/R:






+A: (3:36 a.m.—6:00 a.m.) Niśānta-līḷā - Pastimes at the end of night

/Q: I was born in the darkest ignorance and my spiritual master opened my eyes with the torchlight of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him. His powerful shoulders resemble a lion, an enchanting smile adorns His beautiful cheeks and moment to moment His divine body transforms in ecstasy due to madhura-rasa. His beautiful complexion is more dazzling than a golden lotus. May that Lord Gaurāṅga, the unified form of Rādhā-Mādhava, protect you.
/R: Caitanya-candrāmṛta 13

/Q: May the lotus feet of Pūtanāri always protect us. Kṛṣṇa’s delicate toes resemble the petals of a pink lotus and His slender ankles resemble the stalks of a lotus. Śyāma’s lotus feet hold the honey of His devotee’s faith. The streams of light emanating from Kṛṣṇa’s toenails resemble the stamens of a lotus. The kuṅkuma powder from the budding breasts of Rādhikā, which clings to lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, resembles the pollen of those lotuses.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana Campu 1.2

/Q: I offer my respects to the devotees of Lord Gaurāṅga, who are like dolphins frolicking in the sweet ocean of bhakti-rasa. Free from the fear of death, they care nothing for the insignificant rivers of liberation. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.4

/Q: At the end of night, Lord Gaurāṅga lay sleeping in the kuñja of Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura. His blissful repose was interrupted by the pleasant sound of cuckoos and humming bees. His hair stood on end and His body became soaked in tears as Gaura remembered Rādhā lying beside Kṛṣṇa in the nikuñja- mandira. O mind, please worship the golden Lord Gaurāṅga. Mūla-sūtra: Vṛndā-devi, feeling apprehensive over the impending sunrise, ordered a variety of birds to chirp loudly. The Divine Couple slowly rose from Their pleasure bed being induced by the pleasant and unpleasant poetry of the male and female parrots. The sakhīs and mañjarīs, laughing and giggling, entered the sleeping chamber. Everyone felt so blissful being together that they forgot about going home. Vṛndā-devi gave a signal to Kakkhati, an old female monkey, who shrieked, “Jatila is coming!” Rādhā-Mādhava were still quite thirsty for love’s delights, but They became afraid upon hearing the name of Jaṭilā. Gazing deeply at each other with eyes of longing, Rādhā-Mādhava reluctantly separated and quickly returned to Their homes to take rest.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.10

= P: Niśānta-līḷā (3:36 a.m.—4:24 a.m.)
-L: The sakhīs’ morning services

/Q: Nidrā-devī, seeing that the night was over, awakened Rādhā’s sakhīs, who got up just in time to do their personal services. The sakhīs opened their sleepy eyes and glanced anxiously in all directions. They feared that maybe they had overslept and missed the time for their duties. When they saw that the two joyful lovers were still resting, however, the sakhīs sat quietly on their beds collecting their thoughts.
/Q: One sakhī yawned and teased Her friends, “O sakhīs! How have you awakened, being so exhausted from your intense pastimes with Kṛṣṇa?” The sakhīs then relished the sight of Kṛṣṇa’s nail marks on their lotus-bud breasts with their bee-like eyes, rolling about from staying up all night. At dawn, themañjarīs engaged in their daily duties of making garlands and tāmbūla. They enjoyed smelling the sweet bodily fragrances of Rādhā-Mādhava lying firmly bound by Cupid’s arrows. One mañjarī approached the sakhīs and spoke excitedly, “O sakhīs! Put your lotus faces to the lattice windows and glance within the pleasure grove. Just see how deep sleep pleasantly caresses the two lovers, so skillful in the dance of Eros.” Inside the grove they beheld Rādhā-Mādhava entwined in a deep embrace as They slept. The blue and yellow radiance of Their unadorned bodies caused the jeweled lamps in the cottage to appear like buds of blue lotus and campaka.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.1-9

/Q: One mañjarī said, “O sakhīs, look! A stationary lightning bolt surrounds a black cloud to shower us with mādhurya-rasa. Servants become happy after satisfying their masters. Today however, the servants have been rewarded even without doing service!”
/Q: Elsewhere some mañjarīs prepared garlands, cosmetics and betel nuts. Others put pieces of aguru wood in the incense burners. A gentle spring breeze suddenly appeared to delight the Lord and Lady of the kuñja. The wind blew softly because it was drowsy having just arisen from sleep. The Malayan breeze, kissing the freshly blooming creepers, spread their sweet scents throughout the forest. The bumblebees sleeping in the flowers awoke upon smelling the attractive aromas. Vṛndā-devī, aroused by the buzzing of the bees, realized it was daybreak and glanced anxiously in all directions. She sent her birds to awaken Rādhā-Mādhava.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.15-19

-L: The birds awaken Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa

/Q: The birds perched on the branches just outside the kuñja. Although eager to sing, they silently waited for Vṛndā’s command. On her signal, they filled the grove with their blissful chirping. A swarm of bees, greedy for honey, entered the kuñja and made a humming sound like Cupid’s auspicious conch. The kuñja was decorated with flowering creepers and a bed made of lotus petals. A group of female bees, maddened from drinking honey, helped to wake up Govinda by buzzing even louder than the ringing of cymbals suggesting the joy of love. A flock of cuckoos repeatedly sang “kuhū, kuhū” in the highest fifth note resounding like Cupid’s vīṇā. The female cuckoos sat beside their mates in the mango trees cooing with the intoxication of love. They savored the juice of the tender buds and then vibrated sweet low tones like Rati’s vīṇā. [Rati is Cupid’s wife] The tiger of Cupid, having devoured the doe of the gopīs’ patience, shyness and virtue, now vented his anger at the wolf of their pride by growling in the guise of the cooing doves. The peacocks cried kekā, kekā to awaken Rādhā-Govinda by proclaiming, “Who (ke) except Kṛṣṇa can lift the mountain of Rādhā’s pride? And what (kā) other girl except Vṛṣabhānunandini can chain down and control the mad elephant named Kṛṣṇa?” The roosters’ crowing of ku-kū-ku-kūū sounded like young brāhmaṇas reciting the Vedas by repeating short, long and very long vowels. The soft, sweet chirping of the birds roused the Divine Couple from Their slumber, however, each was unaware that the other was awake. Rādhā-Mādhava were afflicted with the thought of breaking Their tight embrace, so They closed Their eyes pretending to sleep.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.12-21

/Q: Śukadeva, an abode of matchless bhagavat-prema, sang the beautiful Bhāgavata verses to glorify Lord Kṛṣṇa, and to enlighten the people of the world. Vṛndā’s two pet parrots, Dakṣa (skillful) and Vicakṣaṇa (wise), recited verses to wake up the master of the universe.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.28

/Q: Dakṣa said, “O most learned in all the arts of Cupid! O nectar for the gopīs’ eyes! O mad elephant sporting in the stream of Your beloved’s affection. You inundate the whole world with immense sweetness! O ocean of rasa! It is not improper that You are sleeping now, savoring the bliss of Your lover’s lips. The night, well known as the giver of momentary pleasure, that fulfilled Your desire for love is now ending Your love festival with its departure.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.30

/Q: Vicakṣaṇa said, “O lord, please wake up and slacken the embrace of Your beloved. Dawn has come, now quickly return to Vraja. You must cleverly conceal Your erotic desires. If You don’t hurry, Your amorous affairs will be discovered and broadcast everywhere. O bliss of the vrajavāsīs! You are the moon rising over the milk ocean of Nanda’s heart! O flower on the holy creeper of the queen of Vraja! Go home now and make Your friends happy!”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.32

/Q: The female parrot named Mañjubhāśiṇī (charming speaker) said, “O friend of Gokula, ocean of rasa! Glory to You! Wake up and rise from Your bed that glistens like the moon. Awaken Your dear most beloved who, exhausted from the passion of love, lies resting on Your shoulder. O lord of Vraja! The swiftly rising sun is by nature very cruel toward the young damsels of Vṛndāvana. Therefore You must leave the banks of the Yamunā and hurry home.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.23-24

/Q: As two dice (śārī) are always present during a dice game, the two śārī birds (parrots) Śubhā and Sūkṣmadhī are always together during the love affairs of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. The birds said, “O delight of Vṛṣabhānu! All glory to You. Your charm and wealth of love astonish all the women in the three worlds.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.33

/Q: “O lotus-faced Rādhā! Though the night has ended, You continue to sleep deeply, exhausted from the hard labor of love. There is no fault in this but please look, O chaste woman. O sakhī, just see how the eastern horizon, like Candrāvalī, has turned red in anger, as if intolerant of Your enjoyment.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.25

/Q: “Intoxicated from savoring the honey sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face, You are sleeping soundly. However, this is not proper during sunrise, so now I am waking You up.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.34

/Q: Though Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa had awoken, They remained lying on the flower bed in a tight embrace. They were disturbed over the end of night, and did not want to rise from the attractive pleasure bed. Rādhikā lay with Her hips confined by Kṛṣṇa’s knees, Her breasts upon His chest and Her face caressing His. Rādhā’s arms, wrapped around Kṛṣṇa’s neck, served as a pillow. Rādhā, though fully conscious, could not move an inch.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.38-39

/Q: The parrot Dakṣa, an expert in narrating Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and the teacher of countless other parrots, entered the flower grove. Spreading his wings in bliss, he said, “Look, Kṛṣṇa! The sun has risen. The cakravākī [female heron] glances toward the reddish eastern sky and then eagerly toward her distant husband. [These birds separate at night and reunite at sunrise] In fear of the crows, the owls silently enter the hollows of trees. Please immediately give up Your sleep.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.31-32

/Q: “O ocean of good qualities! Beloved of Rādhā! O sun that makes the lotuses of Vraja bloom! O jeweled mountain peak of artistic genius! All glory to You! O master, what are You contemplating as You lie in the kuñja, even though the night has ended? Though You know it is time for Your family to rise, why do You prefer to sleep in the grove?
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.19

/Q: “The peacocks, aware of the time, have awoken and are now piteously crying “kekā kekā” in separation from their mates! They have come just to wake You up. Would any intelligent person neglect the prescribed time for his duties?”
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.24

/Q: The female parrot named Sukṣmadhī [keen intelligence] wore on her neck like a string of pearls all the knowledge about sevā that she learned from Vṛndā-devī. She felt intoxicated from drinking the liquor of prema. She spoke in order to waken Rādhā.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.33

/Q: Sukṣmadhī said, “O sakhī! Give up Your lethargy, get up and awaken Your lover as well! Immediately leave the grove and return home. Do not create an opportunity for the townspeople to defame You. The wise act when the time is right.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.37

/Q: “O moon-faced maiden! All fear has fled from Your heart now that You lie in the embrace of Vrajendranandana. Why do You carelessly remain sound asleep even at the end of night? At least You can move to another place in the kuñja, which resounds with swarms of maddened bees. Are You not even thinking about what Your elders might level against You if they catch You here?
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika- kaumudī 1.3

/Q: “O Sudati! [girl with sparkling white teeth]. A swarm of bees, drunk from sporting in the laps of the white water lilies, move restlessly toward a cluster of blooming lotuses to engage in a love tryst. Because of the time of day the bees have lost interest in the lilies and have become enchanted by the lotus flowers.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.7

/Q: “The stars have vanished from the sky, Your necklaces have fallen from Your body and the white flowers have dropped from the śephālīkā tree. Even though all three have lost their ornaments, only You maintain Your most radiant and exquisite beauty. As the pearls from Your broken necklace have dropped on the ground, the stars have disappeared from the sky and now only a few remain. Just see! Arundhatī (the morning star, personified as the symbol of chastity and the wife of Vasiṣṭha, one of the seven sages), alarmed at seeing You still sleeping on Syama’s chest, hides Her face within the constellation of the Sapṭa Rṣīs.”
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.10- 1

/Q: Rādhā gave up Her sleep upon hearing the sweet, charming words of the parrots. Shortly later, Kṛṣṇa also awakened, satisfied with His happy repose.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.28

-L: The pleasure fatigue

/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava opened Their eyes simultaneously and glanced playfully at each other. However, the impulse of desire disrupted Their mutual vision and made Them very unhappy.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.29

/Q: The Divine Couple’s ankle bells, bangles and other ornaments chimed sweetly and Their limbs shone with attraction. Their faces, surrounded by scattered locks of hair, were illuminated by the splendor of Their necklaces and earrings.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.36

/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava sat up on the bed. With Their eyes still closed, they moved Their hands about to find Their clothing which had fallen off during the previous night’s love sports. It seemed as if Brahmā had collected all the beauty and opulence of the three worlds in the bodies of the two lovers. Rādhā- Mādhava, with Their languid limbs, disheveled hair and rolling tired eyes, had to lean against each other’s shoulders to keep from falling over.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.37-38

/Q: Rādhā interlocked Her fingers, closed Her eyes and raised Her delicate arms above Her head while yawning. Rādhā showed some distress upon noticing the nail marks on Her breasts. Rādhā, fearing that Kṛṣṇa would scratch Her again, blocked His eager hands, saying, “No, no!”
/R: Alaṅkāra- kaustubhaḥ 5. 19

/Q: Rādhā held the corner of Her fine cloth in Her right hand and covered Her lotus face, which was bathed in the light of Her beautiful teeth. Yawning again while raising Her shoulders slightly, Rādhā hummed a sweet melody while snapping the fingers of Her left hand and jingling Her bracelets. Rādhā rubbed Her body and restlessly moved Her shapely hips. Joining Her hands, Rādhā raised them above Her head. In this way, Rādhikā’s lovely face shone like the moon enclosed in a halo.
/R: Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.120-121

/Q: Śrī Kṛṣṇa stretched a little before sitting up in bed. Seeing Rādhā listless from fatigue, Kṛṣṇa lifted Her on His lap. He gazed upon Her sweet beauty with great longing while Rādhikā pretended to sleep. Acyuta smiled softly while drinking the nectar of Rādhā’s beautiful face, blooming like a morning lotus. Rādhikā’s eyes moved restlessly like a pair of khañjana birds (wagtails). The curling black hair surrounding Her forehead looked like a swarm of bees.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.51-52

/Q: Mukunda’s heart filled with joy upon seeing Rādhā’s brilliant, pearly-white teeth as She yawned. Rādhā stretched Her body by clasping Her fingers together and raising Her lotus-stem arms above Her head.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.53

/Q: Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa both stretched Their limbs to ward off the lethargy of sleep. As They yawned, the splendor of Their teeth made it appear that each was offering a jeweled lamp in ārātrika to the other. Rādhā-Mādhava relished each other’s sweetness with the tongues of Their sleepy side-long glances.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.40

-L: Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sweet fatigue

/Q: Vrajendu [Kṛṣṇa] felt immense joy beholding His beloved Rādhā resting on His lap in the gentle light of dawn. Rādhā, feigning soft weeping, smiled slightly. Rādhā’s braid was loose, Her garlands crushed and Her jewel necklaces were broken. Rādhikā was externally exhausted but internally elated. She repeatedly opened Her tired rolling eyes to eagerly gaze upon Her lover. Śrī Rādhā, languid from intense amorous pastimes, offered the golden lotus of Her body to Kṛṣṇa, whose body resembled a dark blue tamāla tree. If a streak of lightning could permanently rest on a dark rain cloud, it could be compared to Rādhā lying in the arms of Śyāma. Śrī Hari’s handsome face, framed by fickle locks of hair and fragrant as a lotus flower, was beautified with makara earrings, a gentle smile and eyes indolent with pleasure. Lotus-eyed Rādhā became eager to enjoy again upon admiring Śyāma’s limbs decorated with bite marks and smudges of kajjala. Rādhā’s soft smile and Her eyes lowered out of shyness ignited Śyāma’s desire for amorous affairs. Kṛṣṇa slowly lifted Rādhā’s lowered head with His left hand. Raising Rādhā’s chin with His right hand, Kṛṣṇa bent His neck and kissed the smiling cheeks of Rādhikā’s lovely lotus face. Rādhā submerged in an ocean of happiness from the touch of Her lover’s lips. Yet with Her eyes half closed and Her delicate hands trembling, Rādhā softly uttered, “No, no!” Rādhā’s contrary mood delighted the onlooking sakhīs.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.54-59

/Q: “Today the incomparable beauty and sweetness of My youth, unrivalled in the three worlds, have attained perfection because they have been blissfully enjoyed by My beloved.” While Rādhikā thought like this, Kṛṣṇa consumed all the nectar of Her extraordinary sweetness with His eyes. Rādhā flushed with boundless joy. She then made Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face the playground of Her enchanting side- long glances.
/Q: [In a mood of svādhina-bhartṛkā, controlling one’s lover] Rādhā said, “O playful one, Your erotic pastimes have caused My clothes and ornaments to fall off and scatter. My sakhīs have not come yet, so why don’t You quickly dress Me as before? Apply Your cleverness in decorating Me. You must beg forgiveness for offending Our cherished deity Anaṅgadeva [god of love] by taking him from the temple of Our minds for worship and not replacing him. You have not yet removed the fingernail scratches, the signs of Cupid’s worship, from My body. Now please do it by applying musk and kuṅkuma. Then You may reinstall Cupid in his proper place.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the crest-jewel of relishers, replied, “O dearest! You have spoken correctly. Cupid is clearly visible on the throne of Your body. Therefore, I will now worship our iṣṭa-deva with cloth, ornaments, perfume, flowers, garlands and sandalwood paste.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.20-24

= P: Niśānta-līḷā (4:24 a.m.—5:36 a.m.)
-L: Mañjarīs’ service and Kṛṣṇa’s agitation

/Q: Ascertaining that Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were awake, the mañjarīs fearlessly opened the door and quietly entered the bed chamber.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.26

/Q: The mañjarīs beheld Rādhā-Mādhava wrapped in a deep embrace as They slept. The blue and yellow radiance of Their unadorned bodies caused the jeweled lamps in the cottage to appear like buds of blue lotus and campaka.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.9

/Q: The mañjarīs saw the bruises on Rādhā-Mādhava’s lips and the fingernail scratches on Their bodies. Their hair was disheveled, Their clothes had loosened and They appeared drowsy from the labor of love. Their necklaces and flower garlands were broken. Observing the Divine Couple like this filled the mañjarīs’ hearts with delight.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.63

/Q: Kṛṣṇa took a comb from Bhānumatī-mañjarī [second name for Rati-mañjarī] and very gently combed Rādhikā’s shining hair. He wove a garland of fragrant jasmine flowers into Rādhā’s long hair braid. Next, Kṛṣṇa used a new brush to expertly paint artistic patterns on Rādhā’s forehead with musk, saffron and sandalwood prepared by Rāgalekhā-mañjarī. Kṛṣṇa adorned Kiśorī’s ears with beautiful ornaments made by Lavaṅga-mañjarī and anointed Her lotus eyes with fresh kajjala.
/Q: Kṛṣṇa took a brilliant necklace from the hand of Ruci-mañjarī and hung it on Rādhā’s chest. Rādhā commented proudly, “You have removed the sandalwood paste and bodice from My breasts. Without replacing them, why have You put on My necklace? Obviously, You do not know the art of dressing.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “O Rādhe! Just watch what I will do! I will paint the most exquisite patterns on Your breasts that will astonish even Viśākhā and Your other sakhīs who are so proud of their artistry.” Śyāma glanced at Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī, Rati-mañjarī, Līlā-mañjarī and other seva dāsīs and they immediately gave Him the ingredients in their hands. As soon as Kṛṣṇa started painting Rādhā’s breasts, Cupid pierced Him with five arrows. [infatuation, intoxication, emaciation, burning, paralysis] Hari’s hands trembled and the lines became crooked. To erase His mistakes, Kṛṣṇa rubbed His chest against Rādhā’s breasts. In effect, Kṛṣṇa cleverly lit the fire of Rādhā’s desire in order to burn the kindling of Her forbearance to ashes. Kāmadeva (Cupid) did not appreciate Kṛṣṇa’s decorative efforts so he exerted his invincible influence. By rubbing Their bodies together, Kāmadeva happily ornamented the two lovers with artistic designs, erasing some, creating new ones and breaking others to pieces. The mañjarīs, with fully blossomed lotus eyes, fulfilled their long cherished desire to witness the amorous pastimes of the Divine Couple. Satisfied, they all made excuses to leave the kuñja so that Rādhā-Mādhava could enjoy again.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.25-33

/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava, succumbing to the sway of rapture, dispersed a wonderful radiance in all directions by kissing and embracing each other with Their creeper-like arms. They concluded Their divine sports, and slept a little more as Their listless bodies collapsed on the crumpled flower bed. Alas! At dawn, the bed and sleep became depressed over their inevitable separation from Rādhā-Govinda. How could they possibly give Them up? Nevertheless, the parrots and other birds recited poetry to separate the Divine Couple.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.41-42

-L: Female Parrots speak to Rādhā

/Q: “O Rādhe! Have You forgotten all respect and family reputation? You should not be lying here! Stop sleeping, which deprives You of amorous delights and quickly get up. Just see how the night has ended! Please return to Your home. Do not hurt Your parents by staying here. Look! O playful girl, the eastern sky has turned deep crimson in imitation of Your reddish lotus feet. “The graceful cakravākī quickly reunites with her dear mate after passing a painful night in separation. Though the full moon desired the radiance of Your face, being unsuccessful, it now wants to give up its life. It is plummeting from the peak of the western mountains. Can anyone prevent this tragedy?”
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.4-6

/Q: “O Sumukhī! [beautiful-faced girl] Please wake up and open Your lotus eyes to see the effulgent faces of Your sakhīs. Your ornaments fell off during the battle of love. Your hair loosened and Your clothing scattered. Your decorations became smudged or wiped off and Your body was bruised. Your sakhīs have come here to assist You.” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.9

/Q: “O Śaśimukhī (moonface)! Just look! Here comes that graceful, playful pet doe of Yours named Raṇginī that You fed with Your own hand. Cast Your merciful side-long glance upon her and she will feel satisfied in gaining Your affection.” “O Kṛṣṇa-kāntā (lover of Kṛṣṇa)! The minds of deer are very pure. The doe, thinking that Your reddish lotus feet are tender new buds, quickly approaches to lick them. She keeps trying, even though Your sakhīs drive her away with their lotus hands.” “O Śaśimukhī! The doe derived great joy from taking Your remnants and drinking Your caraṇāṁṛta. Now she is grief-stricken and sadly gazes at Your moonlike face because You have not looked at her yet. O Rādhā! Hari is curiously measuring the width of the innocent, love-filled eyes of the doe and comparing them with Yours. To remove any doubt of their similarity, Śyāma uses a string of spotless pearls and says, ‘Very good, indeed.’” The affectionate śārikās tried to awaken Rādhā by speaking many pleasing and meaningful words. Afterwards, the ecstatic male parrots approached the kuñja to offer respects to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.12-16

-L: The male parrots speak to Kṛṣṇa

/Q: The male parrots, eager to please sleepy Kṛṣṇa, tried to wake Him by making sweet sounds and speaking many beautiful, cheerful words to satisfy the mind and heart like an ambrosial drink. The parrots, who were learned in the depths of sacred rapture, skilled in using attractive sweet words, absorbed in talks of prema and expert judges of time, chattered attractively to wake up Kṛṣṇa. Wise men never become bewildered at the time of performing their duties! “O Sundara! (handsome young man) Mother Yaśodā is free from all anxiety because she thinks that You are peacefully sleeping in Your bedroom at night. However, now that it is time to wake You, her motherly affection will bring her to Your bedside. You are the knower of time, the destroyer of all suffering, the friend of all Vrajavāsīs and the ocean of good qualities. Though the soft play bed in the forest is the very form of bliss, still for Your own good, You must get up and leave it up immediately!” “Look! A swarm of intoxicated bees have awakened and are now playing in a cluster of lotuses within the flower-strewn forest. Is there anyone who would not be enchanted at such a pleasant time of day? Look! The night lilies’ faces are sad due to separation from their beloved moon and the blue lotuses are smiling brightly on meeting their dear sun. Lovers are separating in one place and meeting in another. Is it not time alone that causes one’s happiness or distress?
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.17-21

/Q: “O fortunate one! Glory to You! I offer my respects to You! Listen! The rooster, seeing You still sleeping, has become disturbed and crows loudly. He is filled with bliss knowing that it is time for his service; a person knowledgeable of time is never bewildered when performing his duties!”
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 1.27

/Q: The roosters woke up, craned their necks, flapped their wings and crowed five or six times. Rādhā felt distressed at their noise. Their crowing had stopped Her from embracing Kṛṣṇa, so Rādhā angrily cursed them. “Hey roosters! Quickly go to hell and crow there!”
/Q: Rādhā slightly slackened Her embrace of Kṛṣṇa’s chest while cursing the roosters. The roosters kept quiet for a few minutes, and Rādhā thought that they had suffered the effects of Her curse. Rādhā, disregarding the imminent sunrise, fell asleep again in Kṛṣṇa’s tight embrace.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.20-22

/Q: The minnow-like eyes of the sakhīs, who would trade millions of their lives for even a particle of the profuse rays of beauty emanating from the joyous young couple, cavorted in the currents of charm and beauty flowing out of the lattice window of the cottage.
/Q: Viśākhā said, “Look Lalitā! Even though Rādhā-Mādhava are niraṁśuka (without cloth), They are āmśuka (covered by an extraordinary effulgence). Though They are vihārī (without necklaces), Rādhā-Mādhava look atihārī (extremely beautiful) with the signs of erotic love on Their limbs. Though Rādhā-Mādhava are an-aṅgada (without bracelets), They are aṅanga-da (giving incomparable erotic joy to each other). Even though They are nir-añjana (without eye make up), They are ni-rañjana (very pleasing to each other). Even though the attraction for each other’s lips has waned (visrasta-rāga-adharatā-abhilakṣitau), Their messed up bed tells the story of a furious battle of love (viprastara-agādha-rata-abhilakṣitau).” Lalitā said, “O sakhīs! Please decide who won last night’s love-battle? I cannot tell because both Kṛṣṇa’s topknot and Rādhā’s braid loosened in the battle and are now tangled together. Moreover, both have bite marks on Their lips and nail scratches on Their chests.” Viśākhā said, “O sakhī! Look! With the kuṅkuma on Her breasts, Rādhā colors Acyuta’s lotus feet with Her heart’s attachment! And Kṛṣṇa proclaims His love for Rādhikā’s lotus feet with the red lac smeared on His head.” Unseen by the Divine Couple, the sakhīs quietly described the wonder of Rādhā-Śyāma’s pastimes. They submerged in an ocean of bliss while praising their own good fortune.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.1-6

/Q: The roosters, partridges and other birds continued their loud clamoring. Rādhā woke up, stretched Her limbs and said, “O birds, please forgive Me and let Me sleep a little longer.” The geese, ducks, swans, cranes and other water birds joined the doves, parrots, peacocks, cuckoos and other land birds in a sweet harmony of warbling as attractive as the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.
/R: Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛtam 1.23-24

/Q: Rādhā-Govinda awoke at the same time and stretched Their limbs. Rādhā’s extended body looked like a bow of golden campaka flowers and Kṛṣṇa’s resembled a bow of blue lotuses. Giving up each other’s embrace, Rādhā-Mādhava felt pangs of separation. They tightly embraced again and experienced intense bliss.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 1.25

/Q: The joyful sakhīs, with gentle sweet smiles, pushed each other toward the entrance of the kuñja. They were unhappy over the arrival of dawn. The sakhīs timidly entered the kuñja along with a swarm of humming bees. Rādhā’s pleasure doubled upon seeing the smiling faces and restless eyes of Her sakhīs. Rādhā immediately got up from Her lover’s lap to greet them. In Her rush to stand up, Rādhā had covered Herself with Kṛṣṇa’s yellow cloth. She looked shyly at the sakhīs and then sat down beside Kṛṣṇa.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.60-62

/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava smiled to greet Their joyful and affectionate sakhīs. In their association, the bud of Rādhā-Mādhava’s beauty (rūpa-mañjarī) fully blossomed. That rūpa-mañjarī (bud of beauty) most expertly served the Divine Couple. [another translation]: The maidservant named Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī became joyful because she is an expert in tastefully dressing and decorating Rādhā-Mādhava.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.7

/Q: One mañjarī placed a pillow behind Rādhā-Mādhava, while another covered Their bare bodies with a soft cloth. Another mañjarī gave Rādhā-Mādhava a mildly sweet, herbal wake-up tonic, which made Their eyes open wide and removed Their dizziness.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.9

/Q: Another mañjarī moistened a piece of soft, expensive cloth with rose water and cleaned the kajjala, tāmbūla and lac stains on Their bodies. Rādhā-Mādhava became so effulgent that Their faces resembled mirrors reflecting Their forms.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.16

/Q: One mañjarī offered Them betel. Another lovingly and gracefully offered maṅgala-ārātrika with a jeweled lamp in such a way, it seemed she was offering her own life airs millions of times to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.17

-L: The sakhīs’ joy in seeing Śrī Rādhā and the pleasure bed.

/Q: The middle of the pleasure bed had kuṅkuma stains from Kṛṣṇa’s body. The edges of the bed were smeared with red lac from Rādhā’s lotus feet. Here and there were sprinkles of sindhūra, sandalwood and kajjala. The sakhīs understood from the marks on the bed that some very special love sports occurred the night before. They saw the pleasure bed, ornamented with wilted flowers,  red stains of betel, eyeliner and patterns of unguents. It was also marked with signs of tight embraces and looked just like their dear sakhī Rādhā, who was adorned with similar signs of Her love play. Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.64-65

/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava’s love bed was marked in various places with reddish spots of kuṅkuma and sindhūra, making it appear that drops of blood had fallen from the wounded enemy named separation. In another place a flower garland and a crushed necklace lay like a broken bow and a severed bowstring. The bed was marked here and there with spots of musk and kajjala, scattered about by that mad elephant, the king of amorous pleasures. The battlefield of love became an object of great curiosity to the assembled sakhīs. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudi 1.38-39

/Q: Kṛṣṇa, hoping to see a sweet variety of emotions (bhāva-śābalya) on Rādhā’s face, winked at the gopīs to draw their attention to His chest. Kṛṣṇa said, “O sakhīs, look here! The star named Rādhā, seeing her lover, the moon, about to depart at dawn, became pained by separation and drew hundreds of moonbeams on the canvas of the sky.” (second translation): “Rādhā, feeling distressed over our impending separation, made hundreds of nail-marks on My broad, dark blue chest.”
/Q: The sakhīs laughed at Kṛṣṇa’s play on words. Rādhā’s eyes lowered in embarrassment and Her cheeks quivered slightly. Rādhā cast a crooked glance at Her lover as if to pierce Him. Rādhā’s slightly closed eyes, glistening with erotic bliss, were brimming with tears and reddish with anger. They moved restlessly due to shyness. Rādhā’s eyes blossomed fully when She glimpsed at the lotus face of Her beloved Śyāma. Kṛṣṇa’s eyes also widened in delight. Rādhā-Mādhava plunged in the ocean of ecstatic love. The joyous sakhīs, intoxicated from drinking the sweetness of the early morning pastimes, had completely forgotten their assigned tasks. Vṛndā found Rādhā-Govinda submerged in the ocean of sweet pastimes. Their sakhīs were blinded by the madness of prema. Apprehensive of the coming sunrise, Vṛndā hinted a command to one of her sārikās (female parrots). The female parrot named Śubhā spoke in a clever way in order to stir Rādhā to wakefulness. She wanted to protect Rādhā from the fear of Her husband and to prevent Her from being ridiculed by the villagers and embarrassed before Her elders. The parrot said, “O lotus-eyed friend! Your mother-in- law will soon rise from bed and call into Your bedroom: ‘Rādhe! Your husband and the servants are coming from the cowsheds carrying lots of milk. Quickly rise and perform vastu worship in the house.’ O sakhī! Before Jaṭilā says this, please leave the kuñja and secretly return to Your bedroom.” The sārikā addressed Kṛṣṇa, “O Kṛṣṇa! The heart of Rādhā’s mother-in-law is filled with doubts and suspicion about Rādhā’s character. Her husband Abhimanyu lives up to his name, which means “always angry,” by speaking roughly and always finding fault. Rādhā’s dull sister-in-law is always grouchy and uselessly defames Her. The night has ended, so why are You not leaving this virtuous girl?” The parrot’s words acted like the Mandara Mountain to churn the milk ocean of Rādhā’s heart. Rādhā felt disturbed, so Her eyes moved like restless fish. Rādhā, saddened by the thought of leaving Kṛṣṇa, finally rose from bed. Kṛṣṇa relished the sight of Rādhā’s frightened, restless eyes and gorgeous face. Śyāma inadvertently picked up Rādhā’s fine blue scarf and quickly rose from the bed. Rādhā- Govinda, their hearts palpitating in fear, held hands and wore each other’s clothing as they left the kuñja. Kṛṣṇa held Kiśorī’s right hand in His left hand and His flute in His right. A dark monsoon cloud appeared to be embracing a flash of lightning. The jubilant sakhīs left the forest cottage carrying various articles, including a golden pitcher, a polished mirror and a fan with a golden handle. One sakhī held a multicolored bowl filled with kuṅkuma and sandalwood. Another grasped a jeweled case filled with betel nuts and someone else clutched a caged parrot. One sakhī smiled slightly as she emerged from the kuñja holding a small, gold inlay ivory sindhūr (vermilion) casket that was shaped like two budding breasts and studded with sapphires. One sakhī collected all the pearls that had fallen from the necklaces broken by Rādhā-Mādhava’s firm embraces, and happily tied them in the edge of her veil. Rati-mañjarī found an earring that had fallen on the bed during Rādhā-Mādhava’s conjugal skirmishes. She left the kuñja and immediately fixed it on Rādhā’s ear. The sakhī named Rūpa-mañjarī snatched up Rādhā’s bodice from the edge of the bed and privately returned it to Her. Guṇa-mañjarī took the spittoon with Rādhā-Mādhava’s chewed betel nuts and distributed the prasādam to the sakhīs outside the cottage. Mañjulālī-mañjarī gathered the garlands and sandalwood pulp that had fallen from Rādhā-Mādhava’s bodies and divided it amongst the sakhīs. The sakhīs, seeing Kṛṣṇa wearing Rādhā’s blue cloth and Rādhā wearing His yellow cloth, covered their mouths with their delicate hands to conceal their laughter. They shared the bliss swelling in their hearts by passing subtle glances to each other to indicate the exchange of clothing. The mirth of the sakhīs brought the Divine Couple out of Their ever-expanding ocean of ecstasy. Rādhā-Mādhava gazed at each other’s faces with widened eyes and stood motionless like figures drawn in a painting. As one cannot immediately detect milk within a white conchshell, it was almost impossible to see Rādhā’s fine blue cloth on Kṛṣṇa’s dark body, or Kṛṣṇa’s yellow cloth against the effulgent golden body of Rādhā. Lalitā angrily criticized the rising sun for interrupting her drinking of the nectar of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes: “O Rādhe! Just see. Even though the sun was stricken with leprosy and lost his legs for disturbing romantic couples, he continues the heinous act. The sages have correctly said that it is very difficult for a person to give up His nature.” Vṛṣabhānunandini nodded in approval of Lalitā’s riddle. Rādhā, Her eyes reddened with anger over the interruption of Her amorous affairs, glanced at the crimson morning sky and said in a sweet, gentle voice: “Even though the sun lost his legs, he returns in a moment to repeat his sinful deed. If Brahmā had given him legs, there would be no night at all.” Śyāma, inspired by the charm of early morning and elated by the ambrosial words of Rādhikā, forgot about returning home. He spoke to the queen of His heart: “Look, My dearest! A mistress has turned red with jealousy on seeing Her lover return at dawn bearing signs of conjugal bliss. Similarly, the eastern sky reddens with envy upon seeing her husband, the sun, arrive at dawn with red marks all over his body from touching other women (the directions). “Look! The lotus is speaking to the white lily: ‘O white lily, look! Even though your lover, the moon, the best of brāhmaṇas, is peaceful by nature and destroys the darkness of sins, by contacting Vāruṇī (western sky or wine) he has fallen from his exalted position.’ The white lily has covered her face in shame within her wilted petals upon hearing the playful talk of the lotus, now joyful in the association of her lover, the sun. “The black cuckoos watch the moon destroy the darkness and think, ‘Since we are black, perhaps the moon will also destroy us!’ In anxiety, they call out to the new moon, ‘kuhū, kuhū.’ The cuckoos think that when the moonless night comes, Rāhu will cover the moon and protect them. “As a woman sighs in ecstasy when enjoying her lover, the forest, crazed with joy on meeting its lover the spring season, emits the same sound as the cooing of doves. O Śaśimukhi (moon face)! A restless bee, covered with pollen from playing in the lilies, now madly pursues his mate, who is just crawling out of the lotus in which she spent the night. “The female heron, yearning to meet her lover at daybreak, blissfully kisses a red lotus, which has become doubly red in the rays of dawn. O Kalakaṇṭḥī (sweet-voiced)! Seeing Us, the swan named Kalasvana has left his mate, who is eager for pleasure, and come to the bank of the Yamunā spreading his wings in joy. “Look, Padma-mukhi! (lotus-face) The goose named Tuṇḍikerī clutches in her beak the half-eaten lotus stalks given by her husband. While constantly gazing upon Your lotus face, she now comes with her mate, uttering soft, indistinct sounds. The cool breeze from the peaks of the Malaya hills carries the sweet aroma of lotuses as he gently plays over the waters of the Yamunā. He teaches the creepers how to dance, relieves everyone’s fatigue and dries the perspiration from the bodies of lovers.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.67-105

= P: Niśānta-līḷā (5:36 a.m.—6:00 a.m.)
-L: Forgetting to go home and Kakkhaṭī’s poetry

/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava, wrapped in sweet talk, forgot all about going home. The sakhīs smiled broadly, intoxicated with pleasure. Only Vṛndā-devī worried over the coming daylight. Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.106

/Q: Vṛṇdā doubted for a moment whether Rādhā-Mādhava’s love sports had finished or not, since the brilliant full moon faces of Rādhā and Her sakhīs had just risen even though the dark night had gone. The Vedas say that as darkness (ignorance) disappears, to that degree light (wisdom) arises. As illumination increases, anxiety and sorrow disappear from the heart. However, for Vṛndā the opposite occured. Such astonishing actions are common in Vraja, which is beyond the scope of the śrutis. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.56-57

/Q: An old female monkey named Kakkhaṭī, who knows when to act, took a signal from Vṛndā and recited poetry while sitting nearby in a tree: “Daybreak, being praised by virtuous men, comes like a female ascetic wearing red cloth and matted locks (jaṭilā) that appear like rays of light emanating from her head.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.107-108


/Q: The gopīs’ faces paled immediately on hearing the syllables ja-ṭi-lā (Rādhā’s mother-in-law). The rising sun of excessive fear and anxiety arose in them to dry up the ocean of their blissful pastimes. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.60

/Q: Rādhikā-Kṛṣṇacandra, determined fighters in the battle of love, tossed in waves of fear as They cautiously walked along the forest path thinking They may meet Their slanderous elders. In a very solemn mood, They carefully looked here and there with restless side-long glances. No one saw Rādhā-Mādhava walking on the forest path or sneaking into Their homes. Due to the naturally affectionate quality of hlādinī śakti, Rādhā-Mādhava delighted the eyes of the sakhīs. Thus, even the perilous path home, was another pleasure excursion for the Divine Couple. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudi  1.42-43

/Q: Rādhā-Govinda, frightened by the mention of Jatīlā’s name, ran down separate paths while holding up Their loosened hair, garlands and clothing. In trepidation, the sakhīs also fled in all directions. Kṛṣṇa imagined that Candrāvalī and her friends were on His left and the elderly cowherds were in front. He feared that the treacherous Jaṭilā was in hot pursuit. Craning His neck in longing, Śyāma looked to His right searching for His anxious lover. Thus Kṛṣṇa made His way toward the village. Govinda- līlāmṛta 1. 110-111

/Q: One sakhī said to another, “Look, Kṛṣṇa returns to His home before the Vrajavāsīs awaken at sunrise. He has thrown away the withered flower garland. Kṛṣṇa’s jeweled necklace broke during the love battle. His lips have blackened from kissing Rādhā’s kajjala adorned eyes and His body displays His lover’s fingernail marks. Afraid of being seen, Kṛṣṇa glances here and there with tired eyes as He runs along the path. See how He stealthily slips into His house!” Stava-mālā, Kuñja-bhaṅga 2

/Q: Rādhikā, fearing that Jatīlā was approaching from behind, walked quickly and gracefully towards Vraja even though She was burdened by Her heavy breasts and hips and using Her hands to hold up Her loosened hair and dress. Govinda-līlāmṛta 1. 12

/Q: A branchless tree in the distance frightened Rādhā more than seeing a poisonous snake before Her. The cawing of crows scared Rādhā more then the trumpeting of an elephant; the light of day terrified Her more than the dense darkness of night. Today, Rādhā is suffering more from meeting Her lover than from separation. Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka 5.34

/Q: Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī, desiring to bring Rādhā safely home, placed Her in the chariot of her mind and walked behind Her. Due to fear and her affection for Rādhā, Śrī Rūpa covered Rādhā with the protective screen of her ash-grey eyes darting in all directions. Soldiers walk before the king shooting volleys of arrows to ward off approaching enemies. Similarly, Rati-mañjarī, fearing the approach of some unfavorable persons, accompanied Rādhā, shooting the arrows of her restless glances here and there. Govinda-līlāmṛta 1. 13- 14

/Q: Rādhā, surrounded by Her sakhīs, entered Her house unseen and lay down in bed. Feeling intense suffering in separation from Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā started crying. Rādhā, in a voice choked with yearning, opened Her heart to Lalitā. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.80

-L: Rādhā’s lamentation and sleeping

/Q: Rādhā sighed, “O Lalitā! You made Me believe that I would meet Kṛṣṇa and submerge in the nectar ocean of His loving embrace. Enticing Me, You took Me from My house and immediately brought Me back. O sakhī! What fault have I made that has denied Me the ocean of nectar?
/Q: “O sakhī! The sun just set in the western sky and now it is ascending the eastern mountain. Was the previous night just an illusion like a flower in the sky? O sakhī! My eyes, ears and tongue burn with the fever of intense longing. But curses on them a hundred times! Today they did not let Me drink a drop of the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s sweet form, voice or lips.” Lalitā replied, “O Rādhā! Last night, Your union with Kṛṣṇa made You study the protocols of nirveda (violating the rules of the scriptures). Now, separation from Kṛṣṇa is making You study the protocols of nirveda (despair). Union with Acyuta made You taste the sweetness of His words, lips and form. But separation tortures You like a deadly poison.”  In the rapture of love, Vṛṣabhānunandini failed to grasp Lalitā’s words. Rādhikā, hoping to see Her cherished lord in a dream, lay down and fell asleep.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam 2.76-80

/Q: A sakhī, who was not present during Rādhā-Mādhava’s waking pastimes, said to another, “Look sakhī! Rādhikā has returned from the nikuñja and secretly slipped into Her sleeping chamber. The blue cloth on Her head repeatedly slips off and She wearily replaces it. Her clothes and ornaments are disarrayed due to love sports. Rādhā’s tired eyes glance hither and thither while She weakly tries to retie Her loosened braid.” Stava-māḷā, Kuñja-bhaṅga 1

/Q: During every yuga, the Ādi-puruṣa manifests, maintains and annihilates the universes. He then enters His abode and sleeps on the bed of Ananta. At that time, the personified śrutis, who expand the Lord’s pastimes, enter unseen into His transcendental body. Similarly, after performing His kuñja- līlā, Kṛṣṇa returned home and lay down in bed. The sakhīs, who expertly nourish Rādhā-Mādhava’s pastimes with their beauty, wit and other good qualities, secretly entered their own houses. Govinda- līlāmṛta 1.16

+A: (6:00 a.m.—6:24 a.m.) Prātaḥ-līlā - Morning Pastimes

/Q: I worship Gauracandra, the golden moon, lying asleep in His bed at sunrise, His body injured from the previous night’s saṅkīrtana. Mother Śacī entered His sleeping chambers, observed Gaura’s injuries and cried, “O my son! How has Your body become wounded?” In great anxiety, mother Śacī repeatedly caressed Gaura’s body to awaken Him and help Him rise from bed. In the morning, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, Murāri Gupta and other devotees came before Gaurāṅga, offered daṇḍavats and asked about His health. Gaurāṇga washed His face with flower-scented water and described the amazing dream He just had. Afterwards, Gaurāṇga took bath and happily ate the mahā- prasādam from the family deity of Narayana. I worship that beautiful Lord Gaurāṅga.

/Q: Mūla-sūtra: I offer respects to Śrī Rādhā! Rādhā was bathed and dressed gorgeously by Her loving sakhīs. Mother Yaśodā called Rādhā to Nandagrāma to cook palatable foods for Gopāla. After Kṛṣṇa finished His meal, Rādhā and Her sakhīs enjoyed His remnants. I offer respects to Kṛṣṇa, who got up every morning to milk the cows in the gośāla, returned home to bathe and ate breakfast with His bosom friends. Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.1.

= P: Prātaḥ-līlā (6:00 a.m.—6:24 a.m.)
-L: The mañjarīs’ activities and Rādhā’s abode

/Q: Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī and the other mañjarīs got up, bathed and anointed their bodies with sandalwood and unguents after Rādhā fell asleep in Her in-laws home. The mañjarīs wore Rādhā’s prasādi garlands, clothing and ornaments to enhance their natural beauty. The mañjarīs, who had rejected all personal desires, manifested charming qualities and splendid behavior as they engaged in Rādhā- Govinda’s loving service.
/Q: A single ray of brilliance from the tip of their toes could easily defeat the flashing of lightning. Rādhā’s mañjarīs were the epitome of cleverness. Although each mañjarī was qualified to be a group leader (yūtheśvarī), they had no inclination because they were ever immersed in the sweet ocean of Rādhā’s service. Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, out of affection for his daughter Rādhā, had an incomparably beautiful palace built for Her on the northern side of Jaṭilā’s quarters in Yāvaṭ. Rādhā’s palace was full of light and decorated with the finest crafts. The magnificent palace was filled with ornate pillars, terraces, roofs, cornices, courtyards, varieties of rooms, doors and balconies. The unique building, illuminated by jeweled lamps, would astonish the eyes of any beholder. There was a sapphire spire shining like a rain cloud on top of the palace. It was ornamented with a flock of glistening silver swans. When the peacocks saw the spire they took it as their friend the rain cloud and opened their tail feathers in joy. Looking closer they saw the silver swans, their natural enemies, and quickly closed their tail fans.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.1-5

-L: Performing services for Rādhā

/Q: There were raised platforms for sleeping, eating and sitting at various places in the palace. Rādhā’s  mañjarīs cleansed them with water and smeared sandalwood paste and other fragrant unguents on them. The mañjarīs would spread soft deerskins on the dry platforms and happily hang canopies laced with pearls above them. One maidservant polished a gem-studded golden pot, while another brought water suitable for the season (warm in winter, cool in summer). Another mañjarī placed a bolster on a jeweled bench covered with colorful cloth. One mañjarī, with tinkling bangles, opened a chest to inspect Rādhā’s dress and ornaments that she had cleaned and stored the previous day. She ground camphor, kuṅkuma and sandalwood. One kind-hearted mañjarī designed a crown, bangles, necklaces and a sash out of fresh flowers. Another servant lovingly prepared tasty tāmbūla (betel nut combined with cloves, nutmeg, catechu and other flavorful ingredients). Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.6-9

-L: Dawn and arrival of Mukharā

/Q: The sounds of cowherds churning milk and brāhmaṇas chanting the Vedas echoed throughout the town. The loud chanting of the brāhmaṇas competed with the cows anxiously calling their calves. In competition, the clamor of the cows and brāhmaṇas rose to higher and higher pitches. The best of reciters broadcast waves of nectar by singing the glories of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The warbling of parrots, sparrows and peacocks reached a crescendo of noise. The inhabitants of Vraja gradually woke up and sat on their beds to plan their days. The village women were excited to visit Nanda’s home to see Kṛṣṇa. Mukharā, a treasure chest of parental affection, arrived at Rādhā’s home. Beholding the beautiful face of her granddaughter made her life worthwhile. Mukharā entered the house calling out, “Rādhā! Where are you my dear daughter?”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.10-13

/Q: Jatīlā, a crafty, suspicious biddy, greeted Mukharā and spoke to her with a desire to increase her son’s prosperity: “Every day, the learned Paurṇamāsī instructs me, ‘O wise one! To attain progeny, long life, wealth and countless cows for your son Abhimanyu, please have your daughter-in-law Rādhā bathe, dress and ornament Herself so She can do Sūrya-pūjā. Never disobey the order of Yaśodā, the queen of the cowherds. And do not worry about the opinion of the common people.’ Therefore, O respectable Mukharā, please adorn your granddaughter with all auspicious blessings so that my son will gain all prosperity.” Jaṭilā said to Rādhā, “O daughter! Quickly rise, perform household worship, take Your bath and collect the items for sun worship.” Mukharā uttered repeatedly, “How surprising! The dawn has passed but my granddaughter is still sleeping!” Mukharā, her heart melting with affection, entered Rādhā’s bedroom and said, “O lovely child! Please get up now. O innocent one, have You forgotten that today is Sunday? You should bathe, offer arghya to the rising sun and quickly prepare for his worship.” Viśākhā, who was serving Rādhā in Her bedroom, awoke upon hearing the old woman’s words. Though still drowsy, Viśākhā got out of bed and said, “O sakhī Rādhā! Quickly rise, quickly rise!” Quote unknown

-L: Rādhā awakens
/Q: Rādhā, feeling slightly bewildered and fatigued from Her amorous pastimes, repeatedly tried to rise only to collapse again in slumber. She looked like a royal swan bobbing up and down in a wave- filled lake. Rati-mañjarī, seizing the opportunity for service, lovingly pressed Rādhikā’s lotus feet. The repeated coaxing of the sakhīs helped Rādhikā rise from Her luxurious bed. Mukharā felt suspicious upon seeing a yellow cloth covering Rādhā’s body. She said, “O Viśākhā! Your sakhī is wearing the same bright yellow cloth that I saw Kṛṣṇa wearing last night! Alas, what madness! What type of behavior is this for a girl from a righteous family?” Viśākhā, startled by Mukharā’s words, glanced apprehensively at the yellow cloth and gasped, “Alas! What’s this?” She quickly said to Mukharā, “O foolish woman! You have become blind due to old age. Can’t you see? The rays of the rising sun shining through the lattice window upon Rādhā’s golden complexion make Her blue dress appear yellow. Why are you needlessly accusing our innocent Rādhā?” A moment later, Lalitā and the other sakhīs, weary and stumbling as they walked from their homes, arrived before Rādhikā.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.43-57

-L: Talks with Śyāmalā Sakhī

/Q: Mukharā, being deceived by Viśākhā, felt somewhat embarrassed so she immediately left Rādhā’s bedroom. One by one, all the sakhīs assembled before Rādhā. They sat with Rādhā on a dais inlaid with gems and gold, absorbing themselves in joking and laughing. Śyāmalā Sakhī, an expert at timings, suddenly arrived. Rādhikā warmly embraced her and offered a seat. The soothing effulgence of Rādhā’s beauty appeared to encompass Śyāmalā. Meeting Rādhikā made Śyāmalā’s heart bloom with bliss, just as a field of grains grows luxuriantly after an abundant rainfall. Rādhā said, “O my sakhī Śyāmalā! I was just thinking of you, and by the arrangement of destiny you have arrived. If the tree of My desire for meeting Kṛṣṇa bears fruit in the same way, I will consider it a good morning! “O beautiful Śyāmalā! My sakhīs constantly water the tree of My desire and it keeps growing, but still it bears no fruit. Why is that? When will I happily behold the fruit of the tree?” Śyāmalā, who knew the inner meaning of Rādhā’s words, playfully answered, hinting at Rādhā’s enjoyment with Kṛṣṇa: “O Rādhā! If Your tree has not yet borne fruit, certainly it will very soon. O tired girl, I am very familiar with that astonishing fruit. Its sweet fragrance maddens the bees and sakhīs. Although You have tasted it many times, it makes You believe You have not and forces You to taste it again. “How astonishing! O lotus-faced girl! You have never seen that fruit whose juice has reddened Your eyelids. And You never tasted that fruit whose touch injured Your lips.” Rādhā: “O Śyāmā! You are joking without understanding the pain in My heart. Therefore, I say to you that after a lightning flash the night seems twice as dark. Similarly, after seeing Kṛṣṇa for a moment, the pain I feel in separation from Him has doubled.” Śyāmalā: “O sakhī Rādhā! That ocean of arts (kalānidhi:Kṛṣṇa), which You compared to lightning, is actually a bright moon (kalānidhi) who has thrilled You by the touch of his rays appearing as the crescent-shaped artwork on Your breasts.” Rādhā: “O sakhī Śyāmalā! He whom you call the moon (Kalānidhi Kṛṣṇa) has given Me a bad reputation instead of giving His rays (skill in the arts). Even if He occasionally gives a moonbeam to My cakorī eyes, that does not satisfy Me.” Śyāmalā: “Rādhā, be frank with us and speak clearly. If I cannot bathe in the sweet Gaṅgā of Your nocturnal pastimes with Kṛṣṇa that flows from Your lotus mouth, I do not want to do anything. O sakhī! You know that without taking an early morning bath, well-bred persons cannot perform their duties. Similarly, if I do not hear about Your affairs with Kṛṣṇa, I cannot perform any actions.” Rādhā, perceiving Śyāmalā’s longing to hear about Her amorous affairs, replied, “O Śyāmā! When the showers from the dark rain cloud bathed Me in the bower last night, some one brought Me to a dancing stage surrounded by innumerable Cupids.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.16-27

/Q: Suddenly Rādhā forgot everything and swooned in ecstasy. Regaining consciousness, Rādhikā asked, “O Śyāmā, when did you arrive?” Śyāmalā replied, “Just now. Sakhī, what is wrong with You? Your listless limbs show Your fatigue. Your lips are pale, Your arms look like withered lotus stems and Your cheeks are without graceful patterns. Today You appear like a young creeper tossed about by the wind, a tender lotus bud crushed by an elephant or a fresh jasmine garland rejected by a mad black bee. “O beautiful girl! You have received something very rare from Your long cherished lover. Otherwise, how has our creeper of fortune borne such fruit? Please tell me.” Pure-hearted Rādhā, questioned affectionately by Śyāmalā, covered Her moonlike face with Her cloth and looked at the floor. Rādhā, in the midst of the blissful sakhīs, smiled sweetly and replied, “O lotus-eyed friend! If I know where I was, where I went, on what path I traveled to meet Him and how I arrived there, how is it that you do not know? I do not do anything without your advice. “Alas! What is that which is beyond the reach of the mind and beyond the realm of thought? Perhaps it was a dream, a magic spell, or just a long period of bewilderment that brought Me bliss or pain, or both, or neither—I cannot say. All I know is that it melted My heart completely and I fell unconscious.”
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 11. 117-222

/Q: Śyāmalā: “You cannot be an expert in amorous arts merely by studying. Therefore, You have not understood. If You really want to be knowledgeable, You should approach Your vilāsa-guru (teacher of love sports) again and learn some more.”
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.224

/Q: Rādhā: “O Sumukhī, I will not meet that teacher again or even look at Him from a distance. Since you are very intelligent, you should continue taking lessons from Him. Your learning will make Me very happy.”
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.226

/Q: Śyāmalā: “O girl with splendid teeth! Kṛṣṇa’s lotus garland covered the beauty of Your pearl necklace when He embraced You. Kṛṣṇa scratched Your breasts and scattered Your pearls throughout the bowers. O doe-eyed one! How were You able to bind with a mere glance the handsome lion Hari, the ocean of conjugal rasa, and confine Him in the cage of Your breasts?”
/R: Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 10.20

/Q: Rādhā: “O slender friend! Who is this Kṛṣṇa that when the two syllables of His name simply enter Our ears We lose all composure?” Śyāmalā: “O girl blinded by love! What are You saying? You are eternally playing on Kṛṣṇa’s broad chest.” Rādhā: “O sakhī, do not make fun of Me.” Śyāmalā: “O bewildered girl, I have just now placed You in Kṛṣṇa’s hands.” Rādhā: “That is true. Yet today seems like the first time I have seen this person flashing like lightning in the courtyard of My eyes.”
/R: Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.148

/Q: Rādhā remembered Her union with Kṛṣṇa and fell silent out of shyness. Śyāmalā, anxious to hear more about Rādhā’s love dalliance, tenderly touched Kiśorī’s chin. Rādhā complied and slowly explained everything: “O sakhī Śyāmalā! Do not ask anything more about My affairs. Alas, it is My misfortune! How can I possibly tell you about My unlimited pastimes. I do not remember anything about Śyāma holding My hand, where I was or who I was, what that hand resembled or what He did. “Aho! Your friend decorated My braid with colorful, fragrant flowers and drew a line of vermilion on the part of My hair. He applied kajjala around My eyes and dressed Me in exquisite clothing. He repeatedly fed Me aromatic betel nuts. Kṛṣṇa displayed so much affection that He held Me on His lap rather than placing Me on the bed.
/R: Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛtam 5.98-99

/Q: “Every day Śyāma places His moonlike face before Mine and continually gazes at Me with unblinking eyes. He is always very eager to talk with Me. Kṛṣṇa lies down beside Me and embraces Me to His chest. O sakhī! How can I possibly describe My affection for your friend, the jewel of all lovers?
/R: Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛtam 5.97

/Q: “O sakhī! The loving dealings of Keśava burn My heart like halāhala poison. His abundant qualities gnaw at My vital organs like a carnivorous insect. His love causes intolerable disturbance in My heart like a stroke.
/R: Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 3.56

/Q: “Am I not aware of the respect I should show My seniors? Do I no longer believe in upholding the reputation of My family? Do I not fear the virulent criticism of slanderous people? What can I do? My mind is so agitated that as soon as I hear about the splendid qualities of that dark youth, My heart breaks into pieces.”
/R: Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.20

/Q: Śyāmalā said, “O sakhī Rādhā! With great passion, You have repeatedly drunk the honey nectar from Kṛṣṇa’s lotus mouth. Therefore, it is not surprising that You are bewildered. Young women go blind just by smelling the fragrance of Śyāma’s lotus mouth from a distance.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.31

-L: Madhurikā describes Kṛṣṇa’s waking and milking cows

/Q: Meanwhile, Madhurikā Sakhī arrived with tidings from Nandagrama. She said, “O Sakhīs! Today at sunrise, I went to Nanda Mahārāja’s palace to perform some task and I saw something very strange. Please listen attentively!
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.32

/Q: “Bhagavatī Paurṇamāsī rose from her bed with the chirping of the birds. She had a great yearning to see Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeṣa-dīpikā 69 “Paurṇamāsī, her heart ever shining with the moonlight of prema, quickly finished her daily rituals and rushed to Nanda’s palace to behold her beloved Acyuta.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.2

/Q: “Mother Yaśodā was churning yogurt into butter for Kṛṣṇa. She wore a fine, saffron-yellow sārī and a belt tied about her broad hips. Due to her intense motherly affection, Yaśodā’s breasts moistened with milk and trembled from vigorously pulling the churning rope. Her bangles jingled and her earrings swung back and forth. Her face, with its very beautiful eyebrows, was wet with perspiration and mālatī flowers were falling from her hair.
/R: SB 10.9.3

/Q: “At sunrise, the loud sounds from all the churning pots rose to the heavens and reminded the devatās of the churning of the milk ocean.
/R: Lalita-mādhava-nāṭaka 2.2

/Q: “When Paurṇamāsī entered Nanda Mahārāja’s palace she saw the pleasant courtyard decorated with drops of butter and yogurt from the day’s churning activities. It appeared like Śvetadvīpa where Lord Acyuta, bedecked in jewels, blissfully sleeps on the soft belly of Ananta in the midst of swirling waves of milk. With great joy, Paurṇamāsī saw Kṛṣṇa, adorned with gems and lying peacefully on His soft bed, surrounded by His loved ones. As soon as Yaśodā, a master of etiquette, saw Paurṇamāsī, who is austerity personified, she happily rushed out to greet her. “Yaśodā said, ‘Welcome Bhagavatī! Please come inside. You are the most respected woman of Vraja. I offer obeisance at your feet.’ “As Yaśodā approached to offer respects, Paurṇamāsī embraced her warmly. Paurṇamāsi was extremely eager to see Govinda. She blessed Yaśodā and asked about her welfare and that of her husband, son and the cows. Yaśodā informed Paurṇamāsī of her well-being, and then quickly entered Kṛṣṇa’s bedroom.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.3-7

/Q: “May Mother Yaśodā, the queen of the cowherds, protect You. Yaśodā’s dark, curly tresses were tied back with a cord and the line of vermilion on her hair part shone attractively. She wore a few ornaments and a multi-colored dress. Her complexion was dark like a blue lotus and her eyes filled with tears as she gazed at Govinda’s face.
/R: Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.4.13

/Q: “Yaśodā leaned on the bed with her left hand and gently stroked Kṛṣṇa’s body with her right. Yaśodā sprinkled the bed with tears of joy and the milk trickling from her breasts. Yaśodā said, ‘O Lāla! Quickly wake up and show me Your lotus face!’
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.13

/Q: Madhurikā continued, “O Gāndharvikā! Listen to what happened next. Yaśodā, noticing Your blue cloth on Kṛṣṇa’s chest, said, ‘Why has Kṛṣṇa given up His yellow cloth for a blue one?’ Paurṇamāsī thought for a moment and immediately answered, ‘O Queen of the pastures! Your son must have exchanged clothes with Balarāma.’ “Paurṇamāsī saw the red betel stains from Your lips on Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks and said, ‘O Mādhava, it seems the reddish glow of Your ruby earrings is reflecting on Your cheeks, which resemble emerald mirrors.’ Kṛṣṇa quickly rubbed off the marks with His hand.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.38-39

/Q: “Yaśodā said, ‘O dear boy! Get up now; the night has ended. Just see the beauty of the rising sun. Your young servants are standing here waiting to expertly attend You. O son! Your pet parrot, Mañjuvāk, whom You fed with Your own hand, sits blissfully in his golden cage. Intent on waking You up, he affectionately sings, ‘jaya, jaya.’ Your laziness comes from oversleeping. Therefore give up Your sleep and rise!’ Yaśodā gently rubbed Kṛṣṇa’s body for a short time and hugged Him. The sound of His mother’s sweet voice and her affectionate touch inspired Kṛṣṇa to rise. Kṛṣṇa thought for a moment, stretched His limbs, yawned and pretended that He was just waking up. Mother Yaśodā instructed a talented group of devoted young boys and girls in their duties and brought them into her quarters.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika- kaumudī 2.3-6

/Q: “Gobhaṭta, Bhadrasena, Subala, Stokakṛṣṇa, Arjuna, Śrīdāma, Ujjvala, Dāma, Kiṅkiṇi, Sudāma and other intimate friends of Kṛṣṇa hastily arrived from their homes. They met Baladeva in a joyful mood in the courtyard and called out, ‘O Kṛṣṇa! Wake up and come with us to Your dear cow shed!’ “Madhumaṅgala, giggling a hee hee sound, said, ‘O friends! Has morning come already? Why is Kṛṣṇa still asleep? I will wake Him up now.’ Madhumaṅgala rose from bed. Although he was still  groggy, he somehow stumbled into Kṛṣṇa’s bedroom. Madhumaṅgala then called out, ‘Get up! Get up!’ “Kṛṣṇa heard Baṭu’s voice and woke up, His eyes rolling languidly from sleepiness. Though Kṛṣṇa tried to sit up, He could not budge. Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.8- 1 “Mother Yaśodā said, ‘O child, get up now and let me wash Your face. Why is Balarāma’s blue cloth on Your body?’ “Yaśodā removed the cloth and said, ‘Hey Bhagavatī! Just see how the restless cowherd boys have colored my son’s tender body with red mineral powder. They have scratched His soft chest with their sharp fingernails while wrestling and playing frivolously. Alas! What can I do?’ Yaśodā’s affectionate words made Murāri’s eyes glisten with shame and bashfulness. “Madhumaṅgala, the comedian brāhmaṇa boy, increased Kṛṣṇa’s anxiety by speaking to the soft- hearted Yaśodā: ‘O mother! What you said is true. Though I try to forbid them, Kṛṣṇa’s frolicsome friends ignore me and always play roughly with Him in the forest.’ (Inner meaning: Kṛṣṇa’s lusty girlfriends ignore me and always enjoy amorous sports with Kṛṣṇa in the forest bowers.) “Kṛṣṇa smiled at Madhumaṅgala’s pun and opened His eyes slightly. Seeing Yaśodā before Him, however, Kṛṣṇa closed His eyes again. “Paurṇamāsī smiled at Yaśodā’s innocent words and Kṛṣṇa’s childish antics. Concealing her parental affection, she said, ‘O intelligent boy! It is only natural that You are happily sleeping, being exhausted from playing so hard with Your boyfriends (or girlfriends). That is ok, but without seeing You, the thirsty calves will not drink their mother’s milk. Therefore, please rise from bed, O lord of the Vrajavāsīs! O Vrajendra-nandana! Quickly get up! Look, Your elder brother, Your friends and the calves have all collected in the courtyard, waiting to go to the cow shed.’ “Now Kṛṣṇa actually sat up, clenched His fists and raised His arms into the air. Kṛṣṇa rubbed His body and yawned, showing His sparkling teeth. Then He rose from bed. Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.15-24 “Kṛṣṇa’s eyes looked very beautiful as they repeatedly opened and closed. It seemed that Kṛṣṇa was half-awake and half-asleep. Nidrādevī, the goddess of sleep, was reluctant to leave His eyes due to the pain of separation. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudi 2.7 “Kṛṣṇa sat on the edge of the bed slowly placing His lotus feet on the floor. Kṛṣṇa yawned and spoke to Paurṇamāsī in a faltering voice: ‘O noble lady, I offer My respects to you.’ Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.26 “Mother Yaśodā touched Kṛṣṇa from head to toe with her palms while chanting the mantra avyādajo’ ṅghrim for His protection. Looking upward, she prayed in a pitiful voice: ‘O God of gods! After many days, You mercifully gave me a son, who is the life and soul of His friends and family. O Lord! I do not know the proper process of worship, but please bestow Your causeless mercy and protect my son at all times.’ Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.35-36 “The very fortunate young servant girls performed ārātrika by slowly moving a splendid, jewel- inlaid ghee lamp before Kṛṣṇa. The joyous male and female servants, who had eternally youthful forms, became absorbed in serving Kṛṣṇa. The boys had attractive turbans tied on their heads and swaying necklaces on their chests. Their bodies were as fragrant as lotus pollen and they wore garments of dark blue, green, white, red and yellow colors. Everyone was ornamented with sterling qualities.” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.8-10 Madhurikā Sakhī continued, “Rising from bed, Kṛṣṇa sat comfortably on a jeweled platform illuminated by four kinds of jewels. All the male and female servants, with cheerful hearts, served Kṛṣṇa with various fine ingredients. Kṛṣṇa slowly washed His lotus face with a steady stream of camphor-scented water poured into His cupped palms by a male servant. After drying His face and hands with a soft, fine linen towel, Kṛṣṇa smiled beautifully and accepted a flexible tooth-brushing twig from the servants. “Kṛṣṇa used a twig from a desire tree to gently brush His teeth, which reflected the radiance of His jeweled rings. The eyes of the servants swelled with joy upon seeing Kṛṣṇa’s earrings swinging back and forth as He brushed His teeth. Kṛṣṇa held the two ends of the nine-inch long, jeweled golden tongue-scraper to clean His tongue, reddened from chewing betel nuts. The sparkling diamond bracelet on Kṛṣṇa’s wrist shone brilliantly. Kṛṣṇa calmly washed His face again with pure water and dried it. Casting a charming glance from His restless eyes, Kṛṣṇa made the mirror before Him bear witness. “One smiling mañjarī grasped a ruby-inlaid comb in her lotus bud hand and gently dressed Kṛṣṇa’s hair. The comb and her bangles tinkled sweetly as she moved her hand. As the day began, one servant, an expert in fine arts, removed Kṛṣṇa’s nightclothes and dressed Him in fresh ones. He washed and dried Kṛṣṇa’s feet and deftly tied a turban on His head. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2. 1-18 “Meanwhile, a cowherd man arrived and said, ‘O Prince! The expert cowherd men are not able to milk the cows. The calves are unhappy because they cannot suck even a drop of milk from their mothers. With tearful eyes, the cows all look down the path for You. They neither let down their milk nor lick the calves standing beside them. Mooing loudly in all directions, they cannot tolerate another moment without You.’ “Thus informed by the cowherd man, Kṛṣṇa, in a joyful mood, bathed His mothers with the nectar of His smiling face. While chewing betel nut Kṛṣṇa stood up and left. “Yaśodā said to Balabhadra, ‘O Balarāma, if You and Your younger brother go to the wrestling arena after milking the cows, do not tarry there. I beg You, after playing for a short time with Your friends, come home and take breakfast.’ “Kṛṣṇa argued, ‘Mother! You do not trust Me. Therefore, you are speaking to Balarāma without saying anything to Me. I am the best-behaved amongst the boys, so why should I be controlled by Balarāma?’ “Yāśodā replied, ‘O child! From Your babyhood, the housewives of Vraja have known about Your so-called good conduct. They complained to me many times about Your conduct in their homes.’ “Yaśodā placed a small, golden milking pot in Kṛṣṇa’s right hand and in His left, a rope as brilliant as lightning for tying the hind legs of the cows during milking. “O Rādhā! In this way, Kṛṣṇa looked even more beautiful than before.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.44-50
-L: Milking the cows
/Q: Madhurikā continued happily glorifying Śrī Kṛṣṇa: “Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells jingled sweetly as He walked slowly toward the cow shed with the gait of an intoxicated elephant. Kṛṣṇa’s curly locks of hair, dark blue like the Yamunā, joined with His glittering diamond earrings, white like the Gaṅgā, to bathe His face in the Triveṇī of beauty. The yellow cādara moving back and forth on Kṛṣṇa’s dark chest looked like a lightning bolt dancing joyfully upon a fresh rain cloud. Kṛṣṇa’s swinging pearl necklace surrounded the Kaustubha gem on His chest as a halo encircles the sun. The forest garland on His neck repeatedly kissed His ankle bells. “Seeing the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa as He left His pleasant home, filled the eyes of Yaśodā and others with great happiness. Kṛṣṇa chewed some excellent pān given by the servants while walking toward the town gate. Kṛṣṇa and His intimate boyfriends like Subala sat together on a mosaic platform just beyond the town gate. Kṛṣṇa’s eyes restlessly darted from house to house, as He thought, ‘Where is such-and-such girl? And what is she doing now?’ “One by one, Kṛṣṇa’s friends arrived and whispered secrets into His ears. As Kṛṣṇa attentively listened to each boy, a beautiful smile blossomed on His lotus face. O sakhī! Since I cannot tell You what they said, Your bee-like mind will have to discover it. “While Kṛṣṇa chewed pān and listened to His friends’ secrets, His turban tilted sideways on His head. Seeing Kṛṣṇa like this, the Vraja-gopīs forgot everything else and just immersed their hearts in the ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness. The stunning brilliance emanating from the jewels artistically arrayed on the net of golden threads atop Kṛṣṇa’s turban was indescribable. “As Kṛṣṇa headed toward the cow shed, the tinkling sound of His ankle bells and the sweet fragrance of His body spread everywhere, forcibly attracting all the village girls from their household duties. The girls frantically climbed the rooftop pavilions in order to continually worship Kṛṣṇa with their lotus eyes.” Madhurikā momentarily relieved the burning pain of Rādhā’s separation by serving Her the rasālā (yogurt drink mixed with sugar and spices) of Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes with His friends. Shortly later, however, Rādhikā’s agony increased a hundred fold.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.53-58
-L: Rādhā’s condition and Śyāmalā’s departure
/Q: Rādhā’s ears filled with bliss but Her eyes burned with an intense fever of separation. When a neighbor suddenly attains fabulous wealth, the pain of envy always appears in those living nearby. Rādhā, full of deep love for Śyāma, said to Madhurikā, “O Cāru-mukhi (gorgeous face)! The golden damsels, whose minnow-like eyes always play in the ocean of Śyāma’s beautiful pastimes, are certainly the most fortunate.” In a pitiful voice, Rādhā continued, “O Śyāmalā, why was I born in Gokula? I have not been able to taste one drop of Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness for even a moment. Consequently, I never feel a trace of peace in My restless heart.” Śyāmalā understood Rādhā’s deep love for Kṛṣṇa. She said to Lalitā, “O sister, I am going home now. I have finished speaking with Rādhā for today. You should take this sweet padminī (lotus; an excellent woman) to Nanda Mahārāja’s palace and offer Her to Kṛṣṇa’s thirsty honeybee eyes.” Rādhā, totally bewildered and distraught in separation from Śyāma, felt each moment to be like a millennium. Though the mañjarīs helped Rādhā brush Her teeth, bathe and so on, She performed these acts only out of habit, without any awareness of Her actions. After serving Rādhārāṇī, the mañjarīs bathed, dressed and decorated Lalitā and the other sakhīs. Just a particle of the brilliance of their lotus feet conquers the effulgence of the Goddess Lakṣmī, who rose from the churning of the ocean and bathed by the rays of the autumnal moon.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 3.59-64
-L: Rādhā brushes Her teeth

/Q: One sakhī brought a diamond-studded seat for Rādhā, and another placed a foot-rest on the floor. Other sakhīs brought pots of water for washing Her face and the ingredients for brushing Her teeth. Rādhā rose from bed and sat on a golden chair. Having just awakened, Rādhā’s clothing and hair were disarrayed. When Rādhā placed Her lotus feet on the foot stool, all Her friends smiled in delight.

/Q: The lotus-faced sakhīs, who assist Rādhā in Her amorous affairs, poured camphor-scented water from a golden pitcher into Rādhā’s cupped hands, where it assumed a reddish color. Rādhā rinsed Her mouth with the water, which became more fragrant from Rādhā’s touch.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.48-51

/Q: Rādhā sipped water from Her palm and swished it around in Her mouth. As Rādhā did this, Her cheeks puffed a little and a soft sweet sound came from Her mouth. Rādhā spat the rinse water into a golden spittoon. While Rādhā washed Her face, some locks of hair fell on Her forehead. She pushed the hair atop Her head with the fingers of Her left hand. Rādhā cleansed Her forehead, cheeks and eyes three times, making them even more radiantly beautiful. A sakhī offered Rādhā an elegant twig from a desire tree to use as a toothbrush. Rādhā accepted it in Her lotus-bud hand and brushed Her teeth. Rādhā’s wrist amulet and earrings swayed back and forth as She brushed Her teeth, which glistened like pearl raindrops. Despite Her rapid hand movements, Kiśorī’s bangles somehow kept silent. One sakhī offered a jeweled, bow-shaped tongue scraper. Rādhā held it between the thumbs and forefingers of Her delicate hands and pulled it back and forth over Her tongue. As Rādhā cleansed Her tongue, which resembled a tender new lotus leaf, Her head slightly lowered and shook, causing locks of hair to fall across Her face. Seeing her sakhīs smiling, Rādhikā also smiled. Rādhā rinsed Her moonlike face and mouth a few times and then washed Her hands. She patted dry the remaining drops of water on Her face with a soft, fine towel offered by a sakhī. One sakhī held a jeweled mirror before Rādhā. Beholding Her incomparable beauty, Rādhā felt that it would be a festival for Priyatama’s eyes. Rādhā washed Her face again with the nectar of Her smile.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 4.2-9

/Q: Kalāvatī narrates Kṛṣṇa’s cow-milking pastime Kalāvatī Sakhī watched Kṛṣṇa and His friends milk the cows in Nandagrāma. Coming to Yāvaṭ, she joyfully described the scene to Rādhā, “Gopāla entered the cowshed with Balarāma and Madhumaṅgala. Gopala looked like the moon rising in the evening sky along with Venus and Jupiter. The devatās, seeing Balarāma encircled by scores of surabhi cows, momentarily thought He was the elephant Airāvata among the snow-capped peaks of Mt. Kailāśa. They mistook Acyuta for a black bee sporting among white lotuses as He moved among the cows, who had raised their heads out of love for the Lord. “Kṛṣṇa happily called each cow by name: ‘O Gaṅgā, Godāvarī, Śavalī, Kālindī, Dhavalā, Dhumrā! O Tuṅgī, Bhramarī, Yamunā, Haṁsī, Kamalā! O Rambhā, Campā, Kariṇī!’ Nandanandana squatted next to the cows and rested His body weight on the balls of His feet. Mādhava held the milk pail between His knees as He milked the cows in the early morning. His gopa friends milked other cows. Kṛṣṇa pleased the cows by affectionately scratching and petting them and inducing them to nurse their calves. By gratifying the cows Kṛṣṇa also felt immense happiness.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.37-41

/Q: “Kṛṣṇa raised His heels and balanced Himself on His toes. His lower back arched gracefully. The milk pail stood between His feet as He milked the cows with His lotus-bud fingers. Kṛṣṇa pulled up His yellow dhotī, exposing His beautiful knees. Kṛṣṇa’s turban tilted from brushing against the belly of the cows.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu 1.88

/Q: “Each cow automatically dropped the milk from her udder out of affection for Kṛṣṇa, who was dearer to her than her own calf. The streams of milk made a deep, low-pitched sound as they filled bucket after bucket and spilled over to muddy the earth.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu 1.90

/Q: “Hey sakhī! Dāmodara balanced on the balls of His feet and kept the milk pail between His knees as He moistened the cow’s udder with a few drops of milk. Kṛṣṇa firmly grasped the teats with His thumb and fingers to milk the cow. The streams of milk made a pleasing ‘shu, shu’ sound as they hit the pail.” Padyāvalī 2.62 Kiśorī deeply relished Kalāvatī Sakhī’s description and forgot all about Her bath. Lavaṅga-mañjarī summoned Rādhā with an anxious heart.
= P: Prātaḥ-līlā (6:24 a.m.—6:48 a.m.)
-L: Rādhā’s bath and dressing
/Q: Rādhā sat on a golden seat covered with a soft cloth. Her sakhīs, who were very skilled in sevā, gathered around, holding bottles of oil and other toiletries. Lalitā removed the ornaments from Rādhā’s body with so much care and attention that it seemed she was picking leaves and flowers from a delicate golden creeper. Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.59-60 Lalitā used some fine cloth to remove from Rādhā’s body all the marks made during the battle of love. Rādhā discarded Her sweet-smelling night dress and donned a garment suitable for an oil massage.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.55

/Q: One excellent sakhī removed Rādhā’s veil and loosened Her black hair, glistening like a rain cloud. Her bangles jingled as she carefully arranged Rādhikā’s locks with a jeweled comb.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika- kaumudī 2.54

/Q: One expert sakhī washed Rādhā’s feet and showed Her a mirror. She lovingly rubbed Rādhā’s body with sweetly scented, reddish oil. Whenever the sakhī viewed a part of Kiśorī’s gorgeous form after lifting some clothing, she would become a little bashful. She would rub that part with oil and quickly cover it. Rādhā’s caring friends anointed Her divine body with oil and massaged Her from head to toe. They sprinkled Rādhā’s body with an aromatic powder of musk, camphor, saffron and sandalwood to remove the oil. One sakhī cleansed Rādhā’s hair by rubbing fragrant āmalakī juice into it. With natural sweet love, she bathed Rādhikā with gentle streams of water poured from a golden pitcher. Lalitā and Viśākhā stood on either side of Sumukhī Rādhā. They slowly bathed Her with camphor- scented water from pots inlaid with rows of diamonds. One sakhī bound Rādhā’s flowing tresses in a towel and squeezed out the excess water. Removing the towel, she spread out Rādhā’s curly locks with her fingers and bound it once again. One fortunate sakhī patted Rādhikā’s moonlike face with a soft cloth, while others dried Her full breasts, beautiful back and lovely graceful arms. One sakhī wrapped Rādhā in a dry towel and slipped off the wet undergarment from Her hips. She dried Rādhikā’s hips by gently rubbing the towel with her hands. Then she tied an attractive red petticoat on Rādhā. One talented sakhī dried Rādhikā’s resplendent breasts and tied on a gem-studded silken blouse, skillfully sewn by some artistic sakhīs. Rādhā’s ruffled red petticoat glittered like sunbeams. Over that, Rādhā donned a golden-threaded dress that kissed the moonlike nails of Her lotus feet. The sakhīs wrapped Rādhā’s body with a fine cloth, which was the color of rain clouds and covered with gold specks, in order to bind the restless eyes of Mukunda.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 4.35

/Q: One fortunate sakhī tied an embroidered cummerbund around Kiśorī’s waist. The cummerbund, drawn together in different places, resembled the shape of a lotus flower. A pair of sparkling diamond and pearl pendants accented its beauty.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.56-66

/Q: The sakhīs sat Rādhā on a gem-studded throne covered with a soft cloth. They happily washed Her lotus feet and adorned Her body with a variety of cloth and ornaments. The sakhīs spread Rādhā’s hair using jeweled combs and their fingers. Then they scented it with the smoke from kṛṣṇāguru [black sandalwood] incense. The sakhīs curled Rādhikā’s abundant locks that had become straight from Her bath. One sakhī painted charming musk tilaka on Rādhā’s forehead and vermilion in the part of Her hair. Another sakhī put a beautiful ornament emitting the radiance of diamonds on Rādhā’s forehead.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.69

/Q: Viśākhā applied the kāma-yantra tilaka below the red line on Rādhā’s hair part and between Her eyebrows. This tilaka consisted of a dot of red vermilion paste above a star of musk and a crescent moon in sandalwood paste. Small dots of sandalwood paste encircled the marks. Viśākhā drew tiny leaf designs in musk from Rādhā’s temples to Her cheeks.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.77

/Q: One sakhī tied a diamond bathed by the gleam of a chaplet of fragrant jasmine flowers on Rādhikā’s head. She tied Rādhā’s hair on top of Her head in a bun with a red silken thread. Rādhā’s hair bun glittered from the diamond and two hanging strands of pearls.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.70

/Q: One sakhī placed beautiful ornaments on Kiśorī’s ears that had a large circular pin fastened to a small golden pin piercing the middle of Her ear. The colorful gems in the earrings cast glittering reflections in all directions.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.72

/Q: One sakhī placed a shimmering string of tiny pearls on Rādhā’s forehead along Her hair line. Another sakhī attached two elegant diamond earrings to Rādhikā’s lovely ears.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.71

/Q: One sakhī made Rādhā’s eyes look like a pair of Cupid’s arrows by anointing them with a mixture of kajjala and ground vitriol of copper. The single pearl fastened in Rādhā’s right nostril reflected the red and black tints from Her lips and eyeliner.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.73

/Q: Lalitā drew makarī (female dolphins) designs on Rādhā’s cheeks. The makarīs appeared to be inviting Cupid, who sports a makara on his flag, by saying, “O Cupid! Come sit on the golden altar. Hari will worship you during His love sports with the red lotus-buds of His lips.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 4.68

/Q: Viśākhā carefully painted a musk dot in the middle of Rādhā’s chin with a jeweled stick. The dot, which further enhanced the charm of Kiśorī’s gorgeous moonlike face, looked like a black bee sitting on a golden lotus petal.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.83

/Q: She anointed Rādhā’s back, arms, breasts and torso with a mixture of camphor, aguru, saffron and sandalwood.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.76

/Q: Citrā Sakhī drew flower clusters, crescent moons, lotuses, makarīs and mango shoots on the slopes of  Rādhā’s breasts. Out of fear of even the slightest movement of Rādhā’s arched, bow-like eyebrows, Cupid’s makara ensign, his arrows, lance and bow have fled to the treasure house of Rādhā’s breasts in the form of the makarīs, flowers, leaves and crescent moons drawn there. Without his weapons, Cupid has now become unemployed.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.78-79

/Q: Citra Sakhī covered Kiśorī’s charming breasts with a red bodice, embroidered with pearls and various colored gems. It seemed like a pair of mountains had been covered by the beauty of dawn replete with a rainbow and a row of stars. Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.80 At the hollow of lotus-eyed Rādhā’s throat, Viśākhā placed a glittering golden, jewel-inlaid swan- shaped brooch to cover the beauty-stealing marks left by the conch shell signs on Hari’s hands. The golden swan was bound by a string tied through the back.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.86

/Q: Viśākhā hung a fine pearl necklace named Gostana over Rādhā’s bosom. Small sapphire beads placed between two small, shiny gold balls were interspersed among the pearls. Over Rādhā’s heart, Viśākhā placed a necklace of coral, pearls, gold beads, rubies, moonstones and sapphires. Viśākhā offered another necklace of elegant pearls interspersed with golden beads as big as āmalakī seeds, strung between pairs of lapis lazuli. Rādhikā satisfied Hari during one rāsa-līlā with Her spectacular singing and dancing. Kṛṣṇa showed His pleasure by gracing Gāndharvikā’s neck with the guñja mala from His. Viśākhā placed that necklace, Kṛṣṇa’s royal treasure, upon Rādhikā’s breasts. The evening sky is ornamented with twinkling stars and a brilliant full moon. Similarly, Viśākhā decorated Rādhā’s bosom with the ekāvalī necklace, strung with large, shiny pearls and an effulgent pendant. Viśākhā placed a four- stranded necklace of jewels on Rādhā’s chest. It had rubies, diamonds set in gold, sapphires and fine strands of hanging golden chains.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.88-93

/Q: The sakhīs happily decorated Vṛṣabhānunandini’s chest with a necklace of blue sapphires. As soon as Rādhā saw it, She perspired, trembled and Her bodily hair stood erect.
/R: Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.73

/Q: The golden silken tassels [made from yāk tail] connected to the strings of Kiśorī’s necklaces hung in succession down the center of Rādhā’s back. The tassels appeared like a golden stair case, constructed by Brahma, for Rādhā’s snake-like braid to easily climb from the slopes of Her mountainous hips to the peak of Her head.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.94

/Q: One sakhī placed bejeweled armbands on Rādhā’s upper arms and jeweled bracelets midway up Her forearms. She also bound Rādhā’s wrist with a beautiful, multicolored silk maṅgala-sūtra (lucky thread), which glowed in the light of Rādhā’s bracelet.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.75

/Q: Rādhā’s sapphire bracelets situated between Her pearl inlaid gold bracelets looked like Rāhu sitting between the sun and moon.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.97

/Q: A sparkling, jeweled signet ring engraved with “Rādhā” boldly sat on Rādhā’s finger. This fabulous ring decimated the pride of all Kiśorī’s rival sakhīs.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.99

/Q: One sakhī tied a beautiful jewel studded sash around Rādhā’s waist and below that, a thin jeweled cord. Another sakhī fixed the splendid ornaments called haṁsakas on Rādhā’s ankles and toe-rings made from the finest jewels on Her toes.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.77

/Q: Śrīmatī’s toenails and foot soles are naturally deep red in color. Nevertheless, one sakhī colored them with red lac. “But why?” you ask. Are there no people worshiping the radiant sun with a tiny ghee lamp?
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 4.96

/Q: One sakhī exclaimed, “O Rādhā! The sakhīs have uselessly applied apply lac to Your lotus feet! Their natural redness is enough to delight the eyes of all. However, Their endeavor will bring one exceptional result: Kesava’s hair will become dyed by Your foot lac!”
/R: Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.63

/Q: One sakhī tied attractive gem-studded ankle bells on the upper part of Rādhā’s feet. Another sakhī held up a diamond mirror before Rādhā to show Her the sakhīs’ artistic skills in dressing and ornamenting.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.78

/Q: Viśākhā smiled ecstatically while giving lotus-eyed Rādhā a līlā-kamala (lotus flower for playing) delivered that morning by Narmadā, the daughter of a garland maker.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.103

/Q: Upon viewing Her reflection in the mirror, Rādhikā became very anxious to entice Śyāma’s eyes with Her splendidly decorated form. The sakhīs’ excellent dressing would attain success when seen by Her lover!
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 2.105

= P: Prātaḥ-līlā (6:48 a.m.—7:36 a.m.)
-L: Hiraṇyāṅgī Sakhī describes Kṛṣṇa’s wrestling and bath

/Q: Hiraṅyāṅgī Sakhī witnessed Kṛṣṇa wrestling with His friends after milking the cows, and then quickly ran to Rādhā to describe the events: “After milking the cows, Kṛṣṇa and His closest friends, who are similar in nature to Him, mutually decided to go to the jeweled wrestling arena. The boys were very eager to engage in their cherished daily pastime. Kṛṣṇa and His fearless friends, all about the same age, engaged in hand-to-hand combat. They all showed great courage, strength, anger and pride as they attacked their opponents from the front, back and side. “Śyāma rested a while. Then He and few of His friends, who had accumulated heaps of pious credits and who were like the roots of the of tree transcendental virtues, entered the massage room. Kṛṣṇa’s affectionate, sweetly smiling servants rubbed oil on their limbs. The joyful servants were skilled masseurs and expert in telling tales and composing verses. They greatly pleased Kṛṣṇa by massaging Him with aromatic oil. The boundlessly fortunate masseurs, who were praised even by Kṛṣṇa’s closest friends, lovingly rubbed Kṛṣṇa’s entire body from head to toe, ever mindful to rub neither too hard nor too soft. “After dispelling Kṛṣṇa’s fatigue with the massage, the attendants removed the oil with a powder of fragrant saffron and camphor. Some young servant girls cleansed lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa’s hair with an astringent decoction of yogurt and amalaki. They bathed Śyāma with camphor-scented water of suitable temperature poured from gold and crystal pots. “One servant girl, glowing with beauty and affection, used a towel to repeatedly squeeze the decoction from Kṛṣṇa’s hair. Another sevā-dāsī gently stroked Śyāma’s body with her soft hands, while another poured water from a golden pitcher. Murāri’s body attained an extraordinary splendor by bathing, just as the beauty of a rain cloud increases when bathed in moonlight, or the color blue contrasted with white, or a sapphire bathed in crystal clear water, or a tamāla tree strung with glimmering pearls, or a blue lotus with sparkling particles of camphor. “A few fortunate boys concluded Kṛṣṇa’s bath by pouring pure water over His head from an auspicious conch shell. They carefully dried Kṛṣṇa’s body by first rubbing it with soft, finely woven pieces of damp cloth. They then dried every part of Kṛṣṇa’s handsome body with a dry white cloth. A gently smiling servant boy dried Śyāma’s hair in the same way using wet and dry towels. “Another skillful servant replaced the wet towel on Kṛṣṇa’s hips with a dry one. It seemed that the dry cloth was rudely pushing the wet cloth out of the way. One boy quickly brought in two fresh silken garments the color of molten gold. A second attendant removed the towel from Kṛṣṇa’s body and dressed Him in the cloth.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.20-31

-L: Kṛṣṇa’s dress and ornaments

/Q: “One young servant boy cleansed Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet and sat Him upon a glittering, gem-studded bench. Another servant stood behind Kṛṣṇa and expertly dressed His hair. He spread out the strands of hair and repeatedly combed with a jeweled comb. He parted Kṛṣṇa’s hair, glistening with beauty, and tied the halves with a strip of white silk cloth. “The rich blackness of Kṛṣṇa’s hair complemented the whiteness of the fine cloth. Together it appeared that a black snake had shed its old skin. Whose eyes would not be attracted to Kṛṣṇa’s hairstyle? Kṛṣṇa’s glossy black hair was naturally curly but bathing made it straight. One servant curled the locks again and scented them. He then mixed saffron and sandalwood paste to paint a circular full moon shaped tilaka mark on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead. “The deep radiant blue Kaustubha gem hung on Kṛṣṇa’s attractive neck soundly defeated the luster of His sapphires, emeralds, diamonds and rubies. Kṛṣṇa donned a few indescribable necklaces of large pearls. One necklace rested upon His chest, one hung to His navel and another extended to His knees. Śyāma attached jeweled, dolphin-shaped earrings (makaras), which further illuminated His cheeks. He was previously wearing them but they had gotten wet during His festive bath. After drying them Kṛṣṇa put them back on. “One servant girl offered Kṛṣṇa an attractive jeweled pendant strung on a silken maṅgala-sūtra (lucky thread). She tied auspicious armbands inlaid with nine jewels (nava-ratna) on Śyāma’s upper arms and bracelets on His wrists. One happy-faced servant slipped a large, radiant ruby ring on Kṛṣṇa’s little finger. The mellow sheen of Kṛṣṇa’s complexion, however, made the ruby’s brilliance seem paltry in comparison. He placed an irresistible jeweled seal ring on Mādhava’s forefinger, “Another servant tied a diamond-studded, bright yellow cummerbund around Śyāma’s waist and a string of bells inlaid with sparkling rubies around His hips. One sincere servant attached Kṛṣṇa’s diamond inlaid ankle bells, which reflected the light from Mādhava’s moonlike toenails. He joyfully held a splendid jeweled mirror before Śyāma’s moonlike face. “One attendant, carrying Nanda Mahārāja’s order, entered Kṛṣṇa’s chambers and announced, ‘O Kṛṣṇa! Your father wants You to donate thousands of cows to the local brāhmaṇas.’ Sweet-faced Kṛṣṇa, who is a vast treasure house of exalted qualities, bound His hair with a turban and donned His yellow upper cloth. In obedience to His father’s command, Mādhava performed ācamana, sat in meditation and donated a multitude of cows. “Mother Yaśodā, feeling that Kṛṣṇa must have become hungry while waiting for His meal, immediately sent some tasty snacks for Him. Kṛṣṇa, whose face radiates more pleasantly than the full moon, ate the snacks of butter mixed with camphor particles, yoghurt, milk and cream. Afterwards, Kṛṣṇa rinsed His mouth and chewed some betel nuts while leaning on the shoulders of a close friend.” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 2.32-46 Rādhikā’s heart swelled in joy as Her ears drank the honey sweet news of Her beloved. A moment later, however, Rādhā felt utterly dejected and cold tears dripped from Her eyes like dew because

/Q: She could not feed Kṛṣṇa the items She had prepared for Him.
-L: Kundalatā takes Rādhā to Nanda’s house
/Q: Clever Kundalatā suddenly arrived from Nandagrāma on the order of Yaśodā, who was an indestructible desire-fulfilling vine of motherly love. Kundalatā’s sight produced ecstatic joy in Kiśorī’s bumblebee eyes. Kiśorī and Kundalatā smiled and asked about each other’s well-being. Seeing how happy Rādhikā became in Kundalatā’s association, the boundlessly beautiful and affectionate sakhīs bathed in a nectar shower of joy. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 4.109- 10 Kiśorī welcomed Kundalatā, “O sakhī! Your unexpected arrival is certainly Vrajeśvarī Yaśodā’s mercy on Me. Through this order [to cook for Kṛṣṇa] Yaśodā showers Me with the nectar of her mercy. Without it My mind would have been miserable and turned against Me, just as without the rising moon, the eastern horizon is devoid of nocturnal beauty. O tasteful one! I know that you have come to take Me to Nandagrāma for cooking. However, first you must convince My mother-in-law.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.1-3 Kundavallī drank pretty-eyed Rādhā’s ambrosial words and replied with a joyful smile, “Ayi sakhī! Since You already know everything, now quickly go to Nandālaya (house of Nanda) with all Your friends. Your superiors will easily grant permission because Yaśodā controls them with a shower of incomparable wealth, cows and grains. All the Vrajavāsīs, including Your elders, are favorably inclined to anything related to Kṛṣṇa. Since Kṛṣṇa is dearer to them than millions of their lives, why would they not give Him whatever He wants? “O sakhī! Mother Yaśodā is so anxious to collect the tastiest ingredients for pleasing her son that she does not even consider what is proper or improper, beneficial or injurious, her own or others’ intentions or even what will bring fame or infamy. Sakhī! Your exceptionally delicious cooking makes celestial nectar seem trivial. Who in Vraja-maṇḍala is not astonished by Your culinary expertise? “O most beautiful lotus-eyed Rādhā! Ever since Yaśodā heard about Durvāsā Muni’s blessing upon You that any food cooked by Your hand becomes tastier than nectar and grants the eater long life, invincible strength and conquest over his enemies, she will not let her son eat any food not prepared by You. Mother Yaśodā firmly believes that the only reason for her tender boy’s conquest of those horrible, vicious demons was His eating food cooked by Your talented hands. “O Śaśimukhī (moonface) Rādhā! Now hear another secret I discovered about Yaśodā’s heart. Just as Yaśodā feels intolerable anguish whenever Kṛṣṇa is away, she feels the same if a day passes without seeing You.” Kundalatā’s words thrilled Kiśorī’s heart, but externally She appeared to ignore them. Rādhā said, “O My learned friend! What you have said is not illogical. Please consider however, if it is proper for a cultured woman to wander around someone else’s courtyard? Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.4-12 “O friend Kundalatā! The normal conduct of respectable women is to stay in their own homes. Yet I can never disobey your words. However, first you should ask old Jaṭilā what she thinks is proper. Even though she has attained many costly gifts from Yaśodā, she will scold Me if she gets an opportunity.” Clever Kundalatā met Rādhā’s mother-in-law Jaṭilā and delivered Yaśodā’s message, even though Jaṭilā always treats Rādhā harshly. Upon hearing Yaśodā’s order, Jatila started worrying over Kṛṣṇa’s

/Q: attachment to her daughter-in-law. Then she remembered Paurṇamāsī’s advice and spoke considerately to Kundalatā: “O dear Kundalatā! My daughter-in-law is perfectly chaste and Her nature is sweeter than mādhvīka nectar. Yet the villagers are prone to fault-finding and that Nandanandana is extremely capricious! Nonetheless, Paurṇamāsī advised me never to ignore the orders of the Queen of Vraja. Now my heart is divided with doubts! What should I do?” Kundalatā answered, “O mother! What you have said is true, however, Kṛṣṇa is not as naughty as you have heard from a few troublemakers. The rising sun opens the lotuses, blinds the owls and induces the cuckoos to sing sweetly. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa inspires moral persons, opposes the wicked and gives joy to the cowherd people. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa will certainly bring happiness to your virtuous daughter- in-law. “Look! Kṛṣṇa’s natural sweetness maddens all the young girls in the world. It is quite understandable that you are concerned about Rādhā’s safety. You need not worry because I will make sure that Kṛṣṇa does not even see Rādhā’s shadow! I will quickly bring Rādhārāṇī back to you.” Jaṭilā said, “O daughter Kundalatā! Your virtue is well known throughout the village. Therefore, I place innocent Rādhārāṇī in your hands. You must be extremely careful that the restless eyes of Nandanandana do not fall upon Her.” Jaṭilā called Rādhā and addressed Her, “My daughter, go with Kundalatā to Yaśodā’s home. Complete her work and return immediately because today You must worship the Sun god!” Jaṭilā’s order made every pore of Rādhā’s divine body pulsate with excitement. Rādhā, however, feigned reluctance and said, “Kundalatā, I have duties at home and I really do not want to go there! Besides, respectable women never wander from house to house.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.18-25 Jaṭilā said, “O daughter Rādhā! How many times can I refuse the polite and insistent request of Yaśodā? You need not worry nor be afraid because Bhagavān Hari will surely protect You. O Sumukhī! (lovely face) Śrī Hari oversees the whole universe. Why would He neglect a chaste girl like You who always follows the rules of morality? Thus, I place You in His hands without any fear.” The sakhīs perceived the hidden meaning of Jaṭilā’s words and broke into smiles. Kiśorī’s dark blue eyes opened widely at first, and then She cast a sidelong glance at the clever sakhīs. Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 5.21-23 To execute Jaṭilā’s firm decision, Kundalatā grasped Rādhā’s hand and said, “O chaste girl, why are You so afraid? I shall protect you.” Rādhā then happily went to Nanda’s palace. Lalitā and the sakhīs walked behind Rādhā bringing laḍdus and other foods for Kṛṣṇa’s breakfast. Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.26- 27 The brilliance of Śrīmatī’s lovely divine body, clothing and ornaments turned the narrow pathways into streets of gold and costly gems. The incomparably sweet fragrance of Rādhā’s body spread in every direction.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.27
-L: Joking with the sakhīs
/Q: Rādhikā avoided stangers on the path by turning Her face to the side, lowering Her eyes and remaining silent. Rādhā covered Her pretty face with Her veil and walked demurely along the edge of the path to Nandagrām. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.26 The corner of Rādhā’s veil slipped from Her chest as She walked blissfully along with Her friends.

/Q: Kundavallī noticed it and affectionately teased Her, “O Rādhā! Your husband Abhimanyu went away for three days to buy some fertile cows. Upon returning, he spent the entire night in the pasture trying to mate them with the bulls. Yet somehow, Your breasts are covered with fingernail scratches and bite marks are clearly visible on Your lips. Today Your chastity is shining brightly.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.28-29 Rādhā’s eyes initially opened wide and then slightly squinted as She tried to conceal Her inner joy. Lalitā commented to Kundalatā, “Yesterday in the forest, a proud parrot pecked Kiśorī’s breasts perceiving them as ripe pomegranates. Moreover, he repeatedly bit Rādhā’s cherry red lips while mistaking them for ripe bimba fruits. This is how Rādhā’s breasts got marred with nail scratches and Her lips got bite marks. Why are you uselessly alarmed?” Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.31 Rādhikā’s body vibrated with tremors of ecstatic bliss as Lalitā’s words sparked memories of Her pastimes with Kṛṣṇa. Kundalatā, smiling slightly at this, glanced at a nearby pond and spoke as if addressing a lotus flower: “O enchanted one! Why are you becoming uselessly unsettled with joyful trembling? The honeybee (madhusūdana), who is the cousin brother of the jasmine creeper (kundavallī), will never again taste what he has already enjoyed.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.32-33 Wise Viśākhā spoke to Kundalatā, who was famous for creating earrings made of wonderful jokes: “O sakhī! Though the tender lotus blooms in affection for her husband, the sun, she trembles in fear of that lusty bee (madhusūdana), whose cousin brother always plays in the jasmine creepers (kundavallī).” Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.35 Rādhā traveled the secluded forest path joking with Her friends. In Her anxiety to meet Śyāma, Rādhikā lost all sense of where She had been or where She was going. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.27 Kiśorī’s heart swelled with eagerness to meet Her Priyatama as She neared Nanda’s palace, the abode of Her topmost bliss (ānanda). Tuṅgavidyā glorified Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine abode to please Rādhārāṇī.
-L: Tuṅgavidyā describes Nandīśvara
/Q: Tuṅgavidyā Sakhī exclaimed, “Many towering trees, flowering creepers and bushes adorn the landscape of Nandīśvara. There are trees of rasāla, jackfruit, mango, betel, arjuna, guvāka, coconut, asana, palāśa, banyan, parkaṭi, khadira, bilva, madhuka, girimallikā, bakula, nāga, punnāga, aśoka, baka, pāṭalī, golden campaka, tamāla, navamallikā, golden yūthikā, yūthikā, yellow amaranth, clove, damanaka, atimuktā, hibiscus, mallikā (another type of jasmine), kandalī, priyaṅgu and tulasī. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu 1. 1, 13 “Behold Nandīśvara’s many lakes full of gleaming waves and ponds of pure water replete with blooming lilies, white, blue and red lotuses, as well as herons, cranes, swans, osprey and ducks! Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu 1.51 “Nandīśvara resounds with the mooing of cows, the shouting of cowherd men and the voices of bards and singers. Nandīśvara is dearer to Dāmodara than even Govardhana Hill, which is worshiped by all the Vrajavāsīs. Vilāpa-kusumāñjali 60 “O Rādhā! You have come a long way from Yāvaṭa and are almost at Nanda’s palace. Have faith that the cherished desire of Your cātaka bird eyes will soon be realized.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.26 Rādhikā trembled, showed ecstatic symptoms like inertia, and momentarily lost control of Herself.

/Q: Kundalatā compassionately brought Rādhā back to consciousness saying, “O Sumukhī! (Beautiful faced Rādhā) Without even seeing Kṛṣṇacandra, You have become so disturbed. Today, I have truly understood Your chastity and all Your friends can bear witness.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.29-30
-L: Seeing Kṛṣṇa at the entrance gate
/Q: Kundalatā said, “O frail one! Even though You have lost control of Your heart, please be patient and listen to me for a moment. If You say, ‘I am upset because of the heavy weight of the mountains on My chest, therefore, I cannot follow your advice.’ I will reply, “Today, I will help You by engaging Giridhārī to hold up the burden of Your two mountains. He is expert at this because of His experience with Govardhana Hill.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.31 Lalitā said, “Foolish Kundalatā! My chaste girlfriend is terrified just by looking in Giridhārī’s direction. Why are you saying such scandalous things about Rādhā and trying to unite Her with Śyāma? Today, noble Jaṭilā entrusted Kiśorī to your hands, but are you doing what is expected of you? O sakhī! Do not think that all women are like you.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.32-33 Kundalatā retorted, “Lalitā! Enough of this useless talk! Rādhā, look ahead near the town gate. The treasured lord of Your heart is sitting on a jewel-studded crystal dais. Kṛṣṇa has already joyfully milked the cows and wrestled with His friends. Now witty Kṛṣṇa waits there with a wavering heart, knowing that You will soon pass by with Your entourage. “Rādhā! Your lover has inebriated all the damsels of Vraja by embracing them with the aura of His beauty. Śyāma displays a three-fold bending form simply because He cannot bear the weight of His abundant sweetness. Even the bees have gone crazy from smelling the aroma of His swinging flower garland. Kṛṣṇa’s restless eyes have taught the art of dance to the sparkling earrings caressing His soft cheeks. “The waves of luster from Kṛṣṇa’s golden cloth, fluttering in the gentle breeze, and His dark blue body spread rapture in all directions. Look! Your enchanting lover rests His left arm, more powerful than an elephant’s trunk, on the shoulder of His dear friend Subala. His right hand outshines the blue lotus it twirls just to subdue all the gopis.” Rādhā fell silent, stunned from drinking the nectarean words of Kundalatā through Her ears and the lusciously sweet form of Kṛṣṇa through Her eyes. Rādhikā immediately regained consciousness however, when the familiar fragrance of Dāmodara’s body drifted into Her nose. Kiśorī’s body broke out in bumps of joy, trembled and became sprinkled with tears of ecstatic love. Somehow, Rādhikā controlled Herself and said, “O sakhī! Is there any other way to enter Nanda’s palace? My feet simply will not move another inch! What can I do?” Lalitā replied, “O Rādhā! Your obedience to Your superiors will protect You from all faults. Do not be shy or afraid.” Thus solaced, Kiśorī proceeded slowly toward Kṛṣṇa. In great wonderment, the two lovers exchanged glances. A powerful wave of sweetness arose from Rādhā-Mādhava’s divine bodies to inundate the sakhīs. Even eloquence personified could not describe the astonishing scene. How amazing! Moonfaced Rādhā, with intense craving, drank the nectar beams of beauty from the cakora bird (Kṛṣṇa). Moreover, the cātakī bird Rādhā showered the dark cloud (Kṛṣṇa) with drops of erotic rasa. [Usually cakora birds swallow moonbeams and cātakīs drink rainfall]

/Q: Kiśorī and the gopīs took their veils in their left hands and gracefully covered their heads. They slowly walked past their Priyatama while cunningly licking the nectar of His lotus feet through the corners of their lowered eyes. After the lovely gopīs had gone a short distance, Hari turned towards them and let His lotus eyes dance upon their splendid derrieres. The gopīs walked through the town gate and then moved their veils slightly off their heads. Tuṅgavidyā jokingly said to Rādhā, “O sakhī! Baṭu (Madhumaṅgala) closely observed how Kṛṣṇa became overwhelmed with attraction upon seeing You. Immediately he hung a pleasant campaka garland around Kṛṣṇa’s neck. Can You guess what it means?” Rādhikā retorted, “O sakhī! Do you think that everyone is like you and wants to hang onto Kṛṣṇa’s neck like a campaka garland?” Rādhikā then smiled faintly and twitched Her eyebrows as She hurried on to the palatial home of Nanda Mahārāja.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.35-47
-L: Rādhā meets Yaśodā
/Q: A jeweled water pot (kumbha) glittered in the rays of the rising sun on top of the golden watchtower at the entrance of Nanda’s palace. A flag bearing the image of a dancing peacock flapped in the wind above the water pot. The interior rooms of Nanda’s imperial palace had crystal walls, gold ceilings and diamond bolted doors. Flanking each door were jeweled statues of women holding jeweled lamps. There were also jeweled birds crafted from costly gems perching on jeweled trees, intertwined with jeweled creepers. The sheer luxury and comfort of all the rooms in Nanda’s palace far surpassed the opulence of Amarāvatī, Indra’s celestial abode. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.48-49 Watchtowers of dark blue sapphires, walls of yellow sapphires and emeralds, ceilings of gold, gigantic doors constructed from radiant rubies, coral pillars, crystal fences and turrets of lapis lazuli —everything was stupendous! The stunning opulence of Nanda’s palace put to shame the brilliant homes of the demigods. Skillfully produced paintings of parrots hung on the jeweled walls. The paintings looked so real that Kṛṣṇa’s pet parrots perched near them for association. When the gopīs saw them, they could not distinguish between the real parrots and the painted ones. In their bewilderment, the gopīs stood there for a long time being unsure to whom to feed the pomegranate seeds. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.152-153 There were four rooms in each direction connected to the main courtyard of Nanda’s charming palace. Nanda’s treasury was on the west side, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s room sat on the auspicious southern side, and Balarāma’s room lay on the northern side. Nanda’s room, resembling Kṛṣṇa’s, was east of the main courtyard. In another room to the east, Nanda Mahārāja worshiped his iṣṭa-deva (personal deity) of Lord Nārāyana for the welfare of his son. The palace kitchen was attached to the storeroom on the south and Kṛṣṇa’s room on the west. Between the kitchen and Kṛṣṇa’s room, was a small room for Kiśorī to rest, when She tired from cooking. Just south of Kṛṣṇa’s residence and the kitchen was a lake and a beautiful flower garden with many lovely cottages and platforms where Rādhā-Govinda secretly met. Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi 1.19-22 Yaśodā flooded with joy when Rādhā arrived with Her sakhīs. She thought that the most gorgeous goddess in the three worlds had descended to illuminate her home. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.52 Rādhā entered Nanda’s home and offered respects to Yaśodā. Mukunda’s affectionate mother happily lifted Rādhā, embraced Her, smelled Her head and kissed Her tenderly while tears flowed from her

/Q: eyes. Yaśodā greeted every gopī in the same way and asked about her welfare. Yaśodā lovingly spoke to Rādhikā to encourage Her to start cooking.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.37-38
-L: Yaśodā’s cooking instructions
/Q: Yaśodā said, “Are You feeling shy? Actually, You are really my daughter not Kīrtidā’s. Seeing Your face gives me the same bliss as seeing Kṛṣṇa’s. Simply by this I am maintaining my life!” Ujjvala- nīlamaṇi 4.45 With great love, Yaśodā invited Rādhikā and Her sakhīs to sit down and eat some soft, tasty sweets served by Dhaniṣṭhā. Afterwards, Yaśodā led them all to the kitchen. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.55 Yaśodā addressed the sakhīs, “O my children! You are experts in making all sorts of delicious dishes. Every Vrajavāsī knows that you can create nectar just by the touch of your hands. Though my son has practically no appetite, please carefully prepare some excellent dishes to make Kṛṣṇa eat with gusto. You can make salty preparations, tasty yogurt dishes, sweets and ghee fried items. “O Rādhā! In the whole world, You alone have mastered all the best techniques of cooking scrumptious meals. Therefore, O delicate one, You should team up with Rohinī in the kitchen and attentively prepare the best of sweets and sabjis. With great care, make the soft, juicy sweet cakes amṛta-keli and karpūra-keli, which defy the taste of nectar, in such a way that Kṛṣṇa will greedily devour them. Within the three worlds, You alone know the secret of making these delicious pastries. O my child! My son longs for that nectar drink called granthi-pāli, so please carefully mix it. Prepare a pañcāmṛta drink with camphor, cardamom and spices. “O Lalitā! You should make rasālā [yogurt drink with sugar and spices]. Viśākhā, you should immediately make the sweet sherbet called ṣāḍava. O Śaśilekha, you make śikhariṇī, and Campakalatā, you churn some thick buttermilk. “O daughter Tuṅgavidyā! Make cheese and whey, mix them with other ingredients and cook different dishes. Citrā, you can make chilled drinks from sugarcane juice. “Raṅgadevī! You can cook some tasty cakes and Sudevī, you make varieties of creams and butters. Vāsantī, you make soft, white phenikās [light pastry]. Maṅgalā! You make kuṇḍalikās [jilebis]. “Kādambarī, You make candra-kānti [a cake with coconut and camphor] and Lāsikā, you cook some rice-flour laḍḍus. Kaumudī, you please make various types of śaṣkulī [large round cake of ground rice, sugar and sesame cooked in ghee]. Madālasā! You make indu-piṇḍa [white moon-shaped cakes]. “Śaśimukhī, you carefully make sweet balls out of pulse mixed with yogurt. Sumukhī, you please make sugar paṭtikās and Maṇimatī, you make various types of rice flour sweet cakes. “Kāñcanavallī, my child! Please prepare laḍḍus using thin strips of wheat flour fried in ghee. Manoramā, make the manoharā laḍḍus and Ratnamālā, you make mauktikas [pearl-sized laḍḍus]. “Mādhavī! You make sweetballs from crushed, husked sesame seeds, as well as the sweet named tila-kadamba. “Vindhyā, you should prepare three types of sweetballs from flat rice, toasted barley and kidney bean powder after first frying them and soaking them in thick sugar syrup. “Rambhā, you can make karambha by mixing ripe bananas, sugar syrup, yogurt and farina in a golden bowl. Manojñā! Make a mango shake with fresh mango juice, sugar and condensed milk.

/Q: “Kilimbā! Make some ghee from the special fragrant butter I churned this morning from the milk of the cow named Sugandhā. “O Ambikā! Nanda personally milked the cow named Dhavalī and has just sent the milk. Now please lightly boil the milk and set it aside. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma will drink it upon returning from the gośālā. “My daughters! Now immediately go to my milk kitchen, which has been smeared with cow dung and sprinkled with water. There you will find many stoves, clay pots, wooden bowls, ladles and frying pans. “O Dhaniṣṭhā, you collect all the utensils from the wooden storage boxes and distribute them to the different cooks. “Raṅgaṇa-mālikā [Rūpa-mañjarī], hurry along with Tulasī [Rati-mañjarī] and the other maidservants to the storeroom, gather all the necessary ingredients and use them where needed. “Indumukhī! You get the different pickles made of hog-plum, mango, lemon, tamarind, Indian gooseberry, lime, jujube, bamboo shoots and ginger root, which have been soaking in oil and salt for many days. “Also remove from their containers the pieces of cooked tamarind, āmalaka, mango and jujube, which have been soaking in sugarcane juice for many days, and array them on a golden platter. “O Śandā! O Śubhā, Bharaṇī and Pīvarī! Miṣṭahastā! All of you collect the fresh milk brought this morning from the cowshed by the carriers, then pour it into the pots on the wood stoves and stir it slowly.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.39-60 Rādhā blissfully honored Kṛṣṇa’s morning snacks. Yaśodā then caressed Her and said, “O lotus faced Rādhā! You bring immense fame to Your mother Kirtida! God has made You expert in the culinary art. Please enter the kitchen and start cooking, taking help from Your friends like Lalita.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 5.56
-L: Rādhā and Rohiṇī cook
/Q: Yaśodā said, “O Śaśi-mukhī [moon face] Rādhā! May You live for a hundred years, and thus completely satisfy my mind and eyes!” The gorgeous gopīs offered respects to Mother Yaśodā, who is a creeper of unparalleled motherly love. Yaśodā in turn delighted their hearts by embracing them and offering her blessings. Beautiful Rādhā humbly bowed down to Kṛṣṇa’s mother. Yaśodā clasped Rādhā’s right hand and immediately took Her to Rohiṇī, the head cook. Rādhikā offered Her heartfelt respects. Rohinī wore a beautiful blue dress and her white complexion glistened like Mount Kailāsa. She always overflowed with motherly love for Rādhā. With her arms outstretched, Rohinī smiled as she called Kiśorī, “Come, come!” She warmly embraced Rādhā and kissed Her cheeks. Youthful Rādhā entered the kitchen along with Yaśodā and Rohinī. Rādhā respectfully greeted the kitchen staff with sweet words and a gentle happy smile. Rādhā became very satisfied to see the unlimited variety of ingredients and cooking utensils all arranged in their proper places. Rādhā inspected the different kinds of pumpkins, potatoes, arbi, yams, gourds, eggplants, radishes, spinach, ladyfingers, chickpeas, kidney beans, tinda, green and ripe bananas, plantain flowers and innumerable types of greens. Rādhā assigned each of the expert sakhīs an appropriate tasty dish to produce for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. The intelligent kitchen workers already cut the right vegetables for

/Q: each preparation in the proper way. Meanwhile, the Vraja-gopīs ground mace, nutmeg, cloves, cumin, ginger, cinnamon, cardamom, coconut pulp, black and white mustard seeds, rice, mung beans, turmeric and dāl beans. They put the powdered spices into golden bowls, sealed them with tight-fitting earthen lids and covered them with cloth. The immaculate Rādhā absorbed Herself in cooking. The stunningly attractive Rādhā put aside Her unnecessary jewelry and clothing and washed Her lotus feet and hands. Kiśorī stood before the stoves with Rohinī and started cooking with great care and zeal. At Rohinī’s signal, the girls stoked the stoves with neatly cut pieces of wood. Atop the stoves, they put the artistically crafted cooking pots of copper, brass and silver. The cooking fires blazed brightly without smoke or the need of fanning. A little moisture sizzled from the burning wood. The maidservants put just the right amount of salt into Rādhā’s hand for each preparation. Kṛṣṇāhnika- kaumudī 2.84-93 Aguru [aloe], sarala [pine] and devadāru [cedar] wood fueled the blazing stove fires. There were containers of sauces and condiments for spicing the preparations in front and on each side of the stoves. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.63 While Rādhā tended the fire, bent over to lift the pots, held containers to pour the cut vegetables into the cauldrons, stirred and tested the boiling vegetables, Her full breasts, Her three-lined belly and Her arms and shoulders shook splendidly and Her clothing loosened. Acyuta’s curious eyes fully relished Kiśorī’s sweetness looking through a small lattice window in His room. Śyāma, intoxicated with desire, spoke to His sidekick Madhumangala just loud enough to attract Rādhikā with the sound of His voice.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 5.57
-L: Yaśodā inspects the preparations
/Q: Yaśodā came in the kitchen and said, “Rohiṇī, let me see the different dishes you and Rādhā have finished?” Rohiṇī, while glorifying Rādhā’s cooking talent, showed Yaśodā the sabjis kept in new clay pots on a clean platform. Rohinī said, “O sakhī, Rādhā is endowed with gentle qualities and She is a master cook! Yaśodā, look at the kṣīra (sweet rice) Rādhā made, cooling in the large clay pot. This sweet ambrosial kṣīra is whiter and cooler than the moon. Kiśorī also made milk pudding from wheat flour and kept it a clay pot. The pudding is sweet, pleasing and nourishing. See the śaskulī made from banana, coconut and cream and the many kinds of piṣṭavikāra. “Rādhārāṇī prepared pīyuṣa-granthi, karpūra-keli and amṛta-keli. Even I do not know how to make them. Rādhā made two types of both salty and sweet dumplings by grinding soaked mung dāl and māṣa dāl. Kiśorī cooked twelve kinds of chutney from tamarind, plums, mango and āmarula. Three varieties of each were made by adding mung dāl dumplings and different amounts of sugar to these four ingredients. “See the banana flowers, water and ground roots, gourds, pumpkin, potatoes and bindi all cut into circular pieces. Rādhikā dipped them in a chickpea flour batter, fried them in ghee and dumped into a sweet sauce made from mung dāl paste. There are chickpea flour patties and other patties fried in ghee and some soaking in a sour yogurt sauce. These delicious cakes were made by boiling chickpeas, mashing them and cooking them in ghee with ground coconut and spices.

/Q: “Rādhārāṇī made a wide variety of eatables by combining nutmeg, cinnamon and curry leaves with different roots, patties and vegetables. Kiśorī made various types of raita by combining pumpkin, jhiṅgā and potato with mustard seeds and yogurt. Kṛṣṇa’s favorite baka flowers and kāñcana flower buds fried in ghee and mixed with yogurt have also been cooked. Rādhārāṇī fried tasty paṭola in ghee and made two types of patties from flowers fried in ghee and soaked in yogurt. There are squash pies of pumpkin mixed with yam and potato covered with powdered, bitter jute leaves and cabikā, a hot spice. “Kiśorī made a mouth-watering dugdha tumbī (pumpkin and gourd cooked in milk spiced with pepper, cardamom and sugar). Rādhā combined deep fried yam with yogurt, sugar and gooseberry sauce and made two types of bael fruit preparations, one with sugar and another with yogurt. Rādhā cooked banana flowers and pumpkin with sugar and yogurt to make a cooling dish with a sweet and sour taste. Rādhā made many spinach items from methi, śatapuṣpī, miṣī, paṭola, bāsūka, vitunna and māriṣa, which defeat the pride of nectar. Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.104 “Rādhārāṇī prepared delicious appetizers by putting kalambī leaves in tamarind sauce and jute leaves with green mango.” Rohiṇī continued, “O sakhī Yaśodā! Today, using mayuṣṭhaka, mung and māṣa pulses, I prepared three types of delicious dāl that defy the taste of nectar. I rolled thin roṭis as round as the full moon from well-kneaded wheat flour. O Yaśodā! You should know that the two of us have finished many preparations. Others are cooking and we are about to cook more. The cooking is almost complete!” Yaśodā, pleased to see all the aromatic, colorful and exotic dishes, complimented Rohiṇī, “How have all these items become so beautiful?” Rohinī replied with astonishment, “All the ingredients and cooking methods are known everywhere. The cause of this wonderful display of culinary art is none other than the elegant hands of Rādhārāṇī.” Rādhā lowered Her head in shyness upon hearing Her praises. Yaśodā noticed that Rādhā was perspiring from the labor of cooking. Yaśodā affectionately ordered the maidservants to fan Rādhā.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 3.84- 12
= P: Prātaḥ-līlā (7:36 a.m.—8:24 a.m.)
-L: Serving and eating
/Q: The festoons and colorful tapestries adorning the royal dining hall filled it with a festive ambience. The various vegetable preparations kept in jeweled bowls were arrayed along the edge of a gem- studded table. Numerous bowls of delicious sweets and golden bowls of various milk products were placed just behind the row of sabjis. Rādhā’s sakhīs created a wonderful atmosphere by artistically arranging the preparations in a half circle and other designs. In the middle of everything was a golden platter containing a huge mound of aromatic white rice dripping in ghee. On the right side they kept a gold plate of condiments—ghee, lemon slices, pickles, ginger, mango and mustard sauce. They placed pitchers of camphor-scented drinking water next to the condiments. Mother Yaśodā was very happy to see Kiśorī’s cooking expertise and the sakhī’s amazing arrangements for serving the food. She dispatched a nurse to bring her boys. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma eagerly walked to the dining hall. Kṛṣṇa, wearing splendid yellow cloth, offered respects to Mother Yaśodā. Under her direction, Kṛṣṇa allowed some young girls to wash His and Balarāma’s feet and

/Q: offer water for rinsing His mouth. Yaśodā reeled in joy to see this. Kṛṣṇa sat down on the special raised dining platform. He became completely astonished to see all the delectable preparations. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.1-5 Balarāma sat on Kṛṣṇa’s right side, Śrīdāma and Subala sat on His left, the joker Madhumaṅgala faced Him and the other boys sat all around Him. Govinda-līlāmṛta 4.22 Rohiṇī and Yaśodā served the food in the proper order and Kṛṣṇa ate accordingly. The preparations were so tasty that Kṛṣṇa could not stop eating. Although Kṛṣṇa could have easily devoured each item, He restrained Himself out of fear that the onlookers would have criticized Him for being a glutton. Therefore, He ate only a little of each preparation. Balarāma and the boys boisterously praised the tasty food. Kṛṣṇa kept quiet but mentally He repeated, “Very delicious, very delicious!” Kṛṣṇa ate the spinach and other items with great gusto just to satisfy Yaśodā and attract the attention of the talented cook named Rādhikā. Dāmodara made His companions laugh with His funny jokes and sweet words. Kṛṣṇa gave immense pleasure to His friends when He told them, “Eat, eat, don’t leave anything behind!” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.7-9 When called by Yaśodā, each gopī happily handed her the palatable breakfast sweet that she had personally prepared for Kṛṣṇa’s satisfaction. Rādhā signaled to Raṅgadevī with Her beautiful blue eyes to give Yaśodā the gaṅgājala laḍdus that She had brought from Yāvaṭa. Yaśodā accepted the laḍdus, put them on a large golden tray and lovingly distributed them to the enthusiastic cowherd boys. Kṛṣṇa laughed and joked with the boys while eating the buttery sabjis. Kṛṣṇa’s sidelong glances repeatedly soared toward the kitchen to peek at Kiśorī’s charming sweet face. In response, Rādhā’s sakhīs swelled in jubilation. Yaśodā pointed her index finger at the different dishes while saying, “O Kṛṣṇa-lāl! This one is superb, this one is sweet and that one is exotic. Please try all of them.” Kṛṣṇa knew the favorite foods of His friends. While laughing, Kṛṣṇa removed those items from His plate and playfully tossed them to the boys whenever Yaśodā was not looking. The comedian Madhumaṅgala, observing Acyuta’s inattention and Yaśodā’s anxiety to feed Him, said, “O Vrajeśvarī (Yaśodā)! Since Kṛṣṇa’s appetite is poor, you can serve His portion to me because my hunger is insatiable. Later, I will embrace Kṛṣṇa and transfer all the nourishment to Him. Besides, Dāmodara cannot digest food cooked in ghee. Better you just give Him boiled rice and vegetables.” Kṛṣṇa smiled at Madhumaṅgala’s joke. Then He took five double-handfuls of rich foods from His plate and filled Madhu’s plate, saying, “Here, just eat this!” The joker Madhumaṅgala slapped his left armpit to make a funny sound before jubilantly devouring the food. Madhumaṅgala blurted, “Hey sakhā, just watch me eat!” Then he quickly stuffed two handfuls of food in his mouth while calling out, “O mother, please bring me some yogurt!” While Yaśodā was in the kitchen, Madhumaṅgala captured everyone’s attention by saying, “Look boys! A mischievous monkey is dancing over there, hoping to get some rich food and yogurt from us.” When the boys looked up to see the monkey, Madhumaṅgala quickly put all his food on their plates. He then proclaimed, “Look, I have eaten everything on my plate!” When Yaśodā returned with the yogurt, Madhumaṅgala said, “O mother! I have already eaten everything without the yogurt. Now just give me lots of sweet rice.”

/Q: Rohiṇī immediately served golden bowls of sweet rice that Rādhā had prepared and cooled by gently fanning it with a wet banana leaf. Rohiṇī also served Rādhā’s steamy hot rice that Vimalā and other servants carried on golden trays. Rohiṇī happily distributed all the items presented to her by Rādhikā in a systematic way beginning with the leafy vegetables and ending with the sour items. Rohiṇī served Rādhā’s special roṭis made of finely sifted whole-wheat flour. They were anointed with ghee and softer than a newly unfurled banana leaf. Govinda-līlāmṛta 4.24-41 There is no fault in repeating the description of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental breakfast and Madhumaṅgala’s funny jokes.
-L: The breakfast joking
/Q: Madhumaṅgala said, “Kṛṣṇa has no appetite for such delicious food. Baladeva can only eat a mouthful. Śrīdāma by nature is a small eater and Subala has became weak (asubala) from eating too little. Alas! On one side, we have persons with no power of digestion and no interest in eating, and on the other side, we have the most incredibly tasty, nectar-conquering food cooked by Lakṣmīdevī Herself! “Everyone knows that elegant poetry is useless in an assembly of prosaic persons. Similarly, all the delicious preparations here are useless in the absence of connoisseurs to savor such delights. These four kinds of foodstuffs are the desired fruits of all human endeavors (artha, dharma, kāma and moksā). What a pity! Only I am qualified to taste these four types of food!” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 6.45- 48 Śrīdāma replied, “Madhu, you should immediately make offerings to your stomach, the all and all for which you have become a brāhmaṇa.” Madhumaṅgala retorted, “O fool! You are just a simple cowherd boy! What do you know about relishing rasa (food or mellows)? Just do your duty and go herd your cows! You are an ignoramus in the art of tasting! However, I am a paṇḍit brāhmaṇa, learned in all the śāstras. Therefore, anyone who feeds me will attain the result of all fire sacrifices offered to the Lord.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 6.49-51 Śrīdāma said, “O brāhmaṇa! Even in a hundred births, you will not know the Vedas and smṛtis! You are known as a brāhmaṇa only because you wear a thread!” Kṛṣṇa intervened, “Baṭo (Madhumaṅgala)! Have you studied all the rasa śāstras (scriptures on taste or mellows)? One should know the characteristics of figurative expressions.” (Another meaning: One should know the characteristics of good cooking.) Madhumaṅgala pontificated, “Some rasa śāstras describe eight rasas headed by conjugal rasa. However, in my opinion there are only six rasas (form, softness, fragrance, sweetness, melodiousness and the emotion of joy), which one can relish through his six senses (mind and five senses). We can behold the attractive form of the food, touch its softness, smell its wonderful fragrance, taste its sweetness, hear its nice sound while munching and mentally feel ecstatic joy from eating. “Those who maintain that without taking shelter of the art of figurative language there can be no appearance of rasa accept eight or more rasas. However, they do not know anything about figurative language (or cooking). Giving up the rasas of soup and sabji, they attempt to relish the rasa of impersonal merging. They are like thirsty people who leave an oasis to run after a mirage. They do

/Q: not know that you must chew to experience rasa (taste). Let them chew, but they will not relish the juice for millions of lives.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 6.52-58 Baladeva, struck with curiosity over Baṭu’s new theory of rasa, inquired, “O brāhmaṇa! In your opinion what are the anubhāvas [13 physical expressions of ecstasy] in tasting the rasa? What are the sañcāri bhāvas [transitory emotions]? What is the sthāyi bhāva [permanent emotion]? How can one taste the rasa? Please explain with proof!” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 6.59 Madhumaṅgala answered, “Haladhāra! Scholars of rasa say that tears (aśru: a sāttvika bhāva) appear after tasting rasa, but I cry beforehand out of grief [viṣāda] if I do not taste any food. When I eat lots of food I become jubilant [harṣa] and the hair on my body stands erect [romāñca]. Satisfaction from eating makes my complexion glow with attraction [vaivarṇya]. While eating, my voice chokes up [gadgada] as I shout in ecstasy. And I become stunned [stambha] with sorrow if I do not devour plenty of sweets. “Right now you can see I am perspiring [sveda], and after eating a huge quantity of food I faint [pralaya]. I am now experiencing the sañcāri-bhāvas of fatigue, contemplation and sleep. There is only one permanent ecstatic mellow [sthāyi-bhāva] named tastefulness but it is experienced in many different ways. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 6.60-63 “The splendid ghee-soaked rice looks like it’s bathed in golden water. Its enchanting aroma pleases all the cowherd men. Śrīdāma and the other boys, who usually only smell the fresh grass chewed by the cows, have attained such a rare treat only by the great pious merit of associating with me, the most fortunate glutton.” Śrīdāma said, “O Baṭu [Madhumaṅgala]! Brāhmaṇas are supposed to perform austerities in the forest and eat only leaves, roots and fruits. Therefore, you should not enjoy in this manner. You should stop eating all this luxurious food, go to the forest and perform austerities.” Madhumaṅgala countered, “O Śrīdāma! You are speaking the truth. In my previous life, I did austerities by eating only forest fruits, leaves and roots. In this life these things have transformed into ghee fried tasty delights. Just see! I am the very proof that one can enjoy heaven on earth! However, such enjoyment is never possible for one who has not performed austerities in a previous life.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 6.70-74 When Rohiṇī served sweet rice to Madhumaṅgala, Subala said, “Wait! If you are giving sweet rice to a brāhmaṇa because he is famous for performing austerity and exhausting everyone with useless speech, you should first give it to the monkeys because they are twice as qualified in that. Monkeys tolerate cold, heat, wind and rain and live in the forest subsisting on leaves, flowers and fruits. Perhaps they also remember their past lives. Who knows their intelligence?” Kṛṣṇa said, “Friend Subala! Brāhmaṇas are fixed in meditation on Brahman. But monkeys are only interested in filling their bellies. The two are vastly different, so why are you comparing them?” Subala said, “O Kṛṣṇa! I do not see any difference between a brāhmaṇa and a monkey. Simply having the body of a man (nara) or monkey (vānara) should not be a cause of making distinctions. To show the world his extensive learning, this brāhmaṇa has interpreted the word Brahman to mean his belly, which is as unlimited and everlasting as Brahman. Baṭu’s worship of Brahman attains perfection by self-worship, therefore, this celibate brahmacārī worships Brahman in his belly, meditating three times a day on how to fill it up. Sometimes he becomes so absorbed in gobbling up huge amounts of

/Q: delicious food that he eats with both hands just like a monkey!” Subala made everyone laugh by singing the glories of the gluttonous brāhmaṇa. Madhumaṅgala laughed too, but since he was eating at the same time, he started choking on his food. He coughed loudly and his face turned red. Yaśodā said, “Baṭu! Do not laugh while eating! Relax for a moment, stop eating and be quiet! O boys, do not laugh at him any more.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 6.79-87 Dhaniṣṭha brought separate plates of savories prepared by Lalitā and others. Yaśodā lovingly served them to the delight of the cowherd boys. Rādhā and Her friends, the embodiments of fortune for Kṛṣṇa’s abode, filled with bliss upon seeing the wondrous moonlike face of their hearts’ beloved. The gopīs, trapped in the net of Śyāma’s sweet beauty, submerged in the rising tide of their deep love for Him. Kṛṣṇa’s friends, who had voracious appetites, thoroughly relished the four types of foods produced from the essence of nectar. They told various jokes, laughed and made Kṛṣṇa laugh too. They chewed the tender items, licked the sweet delicacies, sucked the juicy ones and happily drank the nectarean beverages like milk.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 4.42-45
-L: Kṛṣṇa loses His appetite on seeing Rādhā
/Q: Kṛṣṇa secretly sent His honeybee eyes to Kiśorī’s sweet lotus face while savoring the superb food made sweeter than nectar by the touch of Her hand. Mother Yaśodā experienced boundless bliss upon seeing Kṛṣṇa’s satisfaction with the meal. Rādhā in turn relished the sweet taste of Śyāma’s unexcelled handsomeness with Her timid glances. Though carefully concealing Her feelings from others, Rādhā profoundly attracted Kṛṣṇa’s heart with Her lovely blinking eyes. As Śyāma, the king of lovers, beheld Rādhā’s restless eyes, dancing like an intoxicated wagtail bird, He saw Rādhā as the most tender, sweet food for His senses. Suddenly, Kṛṣṇa lost His appetite, even though Rohiṇī was eagerly trying to serve Him. Mother Yaśodā became very upset seeing Kṛṣṇa listlessly picking at His half-eaten breakfast. With great concern, Yaśodā said, “O child! Though You are hungry, why aren’t You eating the carefully prepared feast? Your reluctance to eat is a great curse on my head! I diligently brought Vṛṣabhānunandinī here to cook the breakfast, which is billions of times more delicious than nectar. Yet still You refuse to eat. Alas! Alas! What more can be done? O my son, Your not eating is killing me!” Yaśodā turned to Rohiṇī and said, “Look Rohiṇī! Though this whimsical, weak boy is hungry, He will not eat!” Rohiṇī, flowing with motherly love, affectionately fondled Kṛṣṇa while coaxing Him to eat: “My child! Rādhārāṇī, who is as delicate and lovely as a jasmine flower, and I have labored hard to prepare all these delicacies. Why are You giving grief to Rādhā, Your mother and me by not eating? Look! Your mother is distressed, thinking that if You do not eat now, later in the day You will feel tired and hungry from roaming in the forest. Please heed my words and eat a little food.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “Mother, I have already eaten quite a lot, so I am not hungry anymore.” Kṛṣṇa suddenly became overtaken with the ecstatic desire to meet Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa concealed His emotions and slowly ate in order to please Rohiṇī and Yaśodā. Yaśodā, desiring that Kṛṣṇa eat all the sweets, pointed out the different items while encouraging,

/Q: “This one is very sweet, I swear it is.” Yaśodā’s eyes flooded with tears as she pleaded, “You should eat everything I give You.” Due to motherly love, Yaśodā’s breast milk and tears flowed in streams to moisten her dress. Although Kṛṣṇa was already full, Yaśodā repeatedly forced Him to eat all the rasālā, mango nectar, śikhariṇī, ṣāḍava, milk, gruel mixed with yogurt, vegetables, yogurt, fruit, piṣṭaka and the many types of cakes and pies. The cowherd boys were impatient to go to the forest after fully satisfying their hunger with all the tastes by drinking, chewing, licking and sucking. They rinsed their mouths with water, washed their hands with refined, scented clay and cleaned their teeth with toothpicks made of īṣikā grass. They performed ācamana with water brought in gold cups by the servants. One servant named Jambula offered Kṛṣṇa clean cooling khādira power mixed with camphor, rose powder, cloves and cardamom to create a pleasant flavor in His mouth. He massaged Kṛṣṇa’s belly with his left hand to stimulate His digestion. Kṛṣṇa accepted a fresh pān leaf from His eager servant Rasāla, and walked a hundred steps before lying down on a spacious bed. The servants waved peacock fans to refresh Kṛṣṇa. Vilāsaka offered some specially prepared tāmbūla.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 4.46-63
-L: The sakhīs eat
/Q: Rādhā left the kitchen, washed Her hands and feet and went to another room. Through a small window, Rādhā enjoyed Kṛṣṇa’s captivating darśana and started perspiring in ecstatic bliss. Yaśodā thought that Rādhikā was perspiring from the exertion of cooking, so she ordered some servants to fan Her with a palm leaf. Yaśodā persuaded Rādhā to sit down and take the food brought by Rohiṇī. Dhaniṣṭhā followed Yaśodā’s order to serve Rādhā the food that she had previously secretly mixed with Kṛṣṇa’s remnants. Rādhikā bowed Her head due to shyness, covered it with Her sārī and declined to eat. Yaśodā, abounding in motherly love, said, “O my daughter! Why are You so timid before me, who am just like Your mother. I love You as much as I love my son. Please give up Your bashfulness and comfort my burning eyes by eating happily before me.” Yaśodā called Lalitā and the other sakhīs, “O girls, you are all like my daughters. Why are you shy before me?” Yaśodā, taking hundreds of oaths to make them eat, fed all the gopīs a delightful feast palatably seasoned with many sweet words. After the meal, the the golden complexioned sakhīs washed their hands and mouths with camphor- scented water given by the servants. They dried their hands with soft towels and chewed betel mixed with camphor given by their friends. Yaśodā intensely hankered to see Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa united in marriage. To express her desire, Yaśodā had Dhaniṣṭhā prepare a treasure chest for Rādhā. The chest was packed full of jeweled ornaments, exquisite garments, vermilion, betel nuts and other gifts suitable for a newly married bride. Yaśodā happily and lovingly presented the gifts to Rādhārāṇī, honoring Her as a newly acquired daughter-in-law surrounded by Her girlfriends. Viśākhā, unseen by Yaśodā, returned Kṛṣṇa’s yellow silk garment to Dhaniṣṭhā, who secretly handed it to Subala in exchange for Rādhā’s blue cloth, which Dhaniṣṭhā gave to Viśākhā.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 4.64-72

+A: (8:24 a.m.—10:48 a.m.) Pūrvāhna-līlā - Forenoon pastimes
/Q: While deeply remembering it, Gauraṅga reenacted the all-attractive, forenoon pastime of Govinda taking the cows to the forest with His friends, which caused immense anguish to the Vrajavāsīs. As Gauraṅga immersed in vraja-bhāva, His hair stood erect, His golden body trembled and became stunned in euphoric joy. Tears flowed torrentially as Gauraṅga shared various ecstatic emotions with His confidential associates. May I always serve that Gauracandra along with His associates, who are ever drowning in waves of divine bliss. Mūla-sūtra: Every morning Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys took the cows to the forest. Due to intense parental love, Nanda, Yaśodā and the other Vrajavāsīs followed them. Kṛṣṇa left the cows and boys at Govardhana and secretly went to Rādhā-kuṇḍa to search for Rādhikā. Rādhārāṇī watched Kṛṣṇa leave Nandagrama with His cows. She then returned home to Yāvaṭ and went to perform Sūrya-pūjū on Jaṭilā’s order. Before departing, Rādhā anxiously looked down the road for Her messenger to return with news of Kṛṣṇa’s whereabouts. May we always remember Rādhā-Govinda’s forenoon pastimes.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.1
= P: Pūrvāhna-līlā (8:24 a.m.—9:12 a.m.)
-L: Kṛṣṇa’s dressing and meeting His friends
/Q: Kṛṣṇa’s handsome cowherd boyfriends named Devaprastha, Varuthapa, Aṁśu, Subala and Śrīdāma and the strong group leaders Viśāla, Vṛṣabha, Stokakṛṣṇa and Arjuna, who resembled Kṛṣṇa in age and qualities, all gathered in Nanda’s courtyard desiring to meet Kṛṣṇa and accompany Him to the forest. Having already bathed, cleansed their bodies and eaten sumptuously, all the boys looked robust and radiant. They sported peacock feathers in their topknots and held flutes, sticks and ropes for tying the calves. Fruits and flowers, colored clay, ankle bells and gunja berries ornamented their transcendental bodies. The excited cowherd boys called out to Kṛṣṇa, “Hey sakhā! All glories to You! Now wake up and let us go play in the forest!” Kṛṣṇa heard His friends’ appeal and rose from bed. Rubbing His lotus eyes, Kṛṣṇa discarded His sleeping clothes. Kṛṣṇa bathed and dressed suitably for playing in the forest and herding the calves. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.15-17 Some expert servants, their happy hearts overflowing with devotion, attentively rubbed scented oil on Kṛṣṇa’s body and adorned Him with exquisite new cloth, ornaments, flowers and garlands. They applied Kṛṣṇa’s special tilaka named bhakti-ccheda. They smeared Kṛṣṇa’s limbs with musk, saffron and sandalwood paste, and drew pictures on His body with multi-colored mineral pigments. They set a peacock feather crown on Kṛṣṇa’s head and slipped on His finger rings, including a unique signet ring inscribed with the name “Kṛṣṇa.” Makara-kuṇḍala earrings hung from Śyāma’s ears and necklaces of guñja, jewels, the Kaustubha gem and a Vaijayantī garland beautified Kṛṣṇa’s broad chest. They put bracelets and armbands on Kṛṣṇa’s wrists and attractively tinkling ankle bells on His feet. On His chest was a necklace of large glossy pearls, in which Kṛṣṇa alone could behold the reflected image of Rādhikā. Śyāma’s jewel-

/Q: studded flute was tucked under the right side of His sash and His buffalo horn bugle was tucked in the left side. Kṛṣṇa held a yellow lāguḍi (straight cow herding stick) in His left hand and twirled a play lotus flower in His right hand to enchant the minds of the Vraja-gopīs. Govinda-līlāmṛta 4.73-75 Śyāma wore a most attractive iridescent peacock feather and a string of shiny red gunja berries in His topknot. Sapphire earrings and clusters of punnaga flowers adorned His ears. Necklaces of pearls and gunja berries hung on His broad chest. Thus attired in yellow cloth and a variety of ornaments, Kṛṣṇa looked marvelous as He prepared to enter the forest. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.18 Balarāma, whose beautiful body was as white as a snowy mountain, had unguents smeared on His form, a peacock feather jutting from His top knot and armlets and bracelets of gold and jewels on His arms. He donned a blue dhotī and held a horn and stick in His hands as He met His companions.
-L: Service items for forest play
/Q: Raktaka, Patraka and other loyal servants, whose love for Kṛṣṇa never decreased and who were expert at tending Kṛṣṇa’s needs, approached Kṛṣṇa’s mother. Yaśodā gave one servant some modaka sweets for Kṛṣṇa to eat later. The sweets were like a string of fruits on the creeper of Yaśodā’s motherly affection. The attendant secured the sweets, which he considered more precious than billions of his lives, in a jewel studded wooden box hanging from his shoulder. Another servant carried an artistically designed flask made of moonstone, which was filled with camphor-scented drinking water and covered with a soft red cloth. As he carried the white flask covered by the red cloth, it appeared that he was showing everyone his pure liquefied mind colored by his internal attraction to the Lord. One servant attentively held a round crystal box filled with pān. Seeing his intense concentration on that container, one would think he was carrying the moon, the lord of the mind, in that container. For serving the prince of Vṛndāvana, another boy carried many types of ornaments and clothing, which were like magic herbs to subjugate the young damsels of Vraja. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 7. 1-17 On the order of Nanda and Yaśodā, the young, affectionate cowherd boys carried Kṛṣṇa’s cloth and ornaments for changing dress later in the day. They walked behind Kṛṣṇa in a jolly mood. They also brought boxes of tāmbūla and jeweled inlaid water jugs. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.19 Kṛṣṇa, decorated with splendid ornaments and festive attire, removed the affliction of the Vrajavāsīs, and inundated the area of His mother with a flood (her tears and the milk flowing spontaneously from her breasts) of bliss as He stood before the town gate.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 7.23
-L: The gopīs’ responses to Kṛṣṇa’s leaving
/Q: When the heralds proclaimed Kṛṣṇa’s departure, the Vraja-gopīs heard it and responded in various ways within their houses according to their qualifications. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 7.25 One gopī told another, “O expert friend! Make me happy by devising some trick to deceive my mother-in-law. I am rushing off to the secret forest path leading to the cottage in the trysting kuñja.” Another blissful sakhī said, “O sakhī! What shall I do now? Hearing the announcement from the town gate about Kṛṣṇa’s departure, I have become intensely eager to see Him. However, I cannot climb the watchtower because my legs are stunned in ecstasy!” While getting dressed, one sakhī said, “O sakhī! What is the use of styling My hair? Let my breasts remain uncovered. If I cannot see Mādhava just once, let me perish!”

/Q: A sakhī, trapped inside her home by her relatives, said, “O! Such is my fate! Let my husband punish me with unbearable pain. I do not care if my elders see me! Today I am going to Kṛṣṇa because He will not remain in the forest for long!” One sakhī, restrained by her mother-in-law, said, “O ugly woman! Why are you screaming? Am I the only one going out of her house? Just open your eyes and look! Which young bride is not leaving her home and which mother-in-law is there to stop her?” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 7.29-33 Going to the forest As Kṛṣṇa strolled down the road, the celestials honored Him with showers of fragrant flowers. The young damsels of Vraja worshiped Kṛṣṇa from their windows with the petals of their lotus eyes. The toddlers on the roadside respected Kṛṣṇa by saying “Jaya! Jaya!” in soft, indistinct voices. The village elders standing in their doorways blessed Kṛṣṇa by raising their right palms. Kṛṣṇāhnika- kaumudī 3.21 Kṛṣṇa blew His buffalo horn called Mandraghoṣa (thunderous sound) as He neared the gośālās. The horn’s vibration pleased the Vrajavāsīs and destroyed all inauspiciousness. When the gopīs heard it, however, they became especially captivated as their love peaked in high waves. Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.2 Kṛṣṇa’s happiness increased while viewing the village sights. In some places, dried cow dung cakes were stacked as high as mountains. There were innumerable gośālās housing Vraja’s unlimited wealth of cows. The blossoming branches of the trees provided natural shelters for the calves. The mixture of earth and powdered dry cow dung made the pathways soft and pleasing to walk on. Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.6 Nanda Mahārāja supervised the milking of the multitudes of cows, and had the servants lead the calves to a separate area. The cows, with restless hearts and upraised ears, mooed affectionately while fixing their eyes on Kṛṣṇa as they waited for Him to take them to the forest. The masses of white cows, shining like the effulgence of the moon on Siva’s head, appeared like the island of Svetadvīpa. Lord Śrīdhara, the husband of Lakṣmī, ever enacts pastimes in Svetadvīpa, but this Svetadvīpa now stood before Kṛṣṇa, waiting to enact the pastimes of cow herding. Kṛṣṇa’s cows produced oceans of milk and were more attractive than the ocean of milk. Kṛṣṇa’s cows astonished even Lakṣmī, who arose from the ocean of milk. Even one cow extinguished the fame of all the kāma dhenus in the universe! What more can be said? How can one adequately describe the cows of Vraja, who are the Vedas incarnate and whose milk was daily drunk by Kṛṣṇa? The cows automatically formed rows and started walking when they saw Kṛṣṇa approaching with His friends. Their happy mooing filled the directions and created a festival of delight for the ears. Śrīdāma, Subala and other cowherd boys ran beside, behind and in front of Kṛṣṇa shouting, “I will touch Kṛṣṇa first!” The jeweled ornaments, gunja necklaces and peacock feathers atop their heads glittered in all directions. The pleasing sounds of their flutes, horns and panpipes combined with the deep lowing of the cows to rival the rumbling of thunder. As the music resounded through the heavens, the demigods lost their gravity and glorified Kṛṣṇa’s procession with shouts of “Jaya! Jaya!” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.20-25 Vrajabhūmi (the land of Vraja) eagerly manifested the lotus of her heart wherever lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa placed His lotus feet while walking in the forest. Vrajabhūmi felt thrilled from the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s

/Q: lotus feet. She responded by sprouting new shoots from the grass that the cows had already chewed or tread upon with their hooves. The sprouts appeared like her bodily hair standing erect due to ecstasy. The many women, children and old folks running out of their homes to see Kṛṣṇa’s procession looked like a river flowing down the high mountain of Vraja to merge into the ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s nectarean darśana. Their eyes, wide with eagerness, resembled blossoming lotus flowers in the river. As Kṛṣṇa showered them with His darśana, their joy increased unlimitedly. Rivers of tears flowed from their eyes and rushed swiftly toward the ocean of Kṛṣṇa. Yaśodā became very eager to see her son. Out of intense maternal love for Kṛṣṇa, tears flowed from her eyes and milk trickled from her breasts, wetting her sārī. Balarāma’s mother Rohiṇī, the wives of Upananda, Kṛṣṇa’s nurses Kalimbā and Ambikā and all the other elderly women became impatient to see Kṛṣṇa. As the sura-taraṅgini (celestial Gaṅgā) merges with the sea, the sura-taraṅgini (playful waves of conjugal bliss) of Rādhā’s glances merged in the sweet ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s rasa-filled form. The gopī group leaders—Maṅgalā, Śyāmalā, Bhadrā, Pālī and Candrāvalī came from all directions with their entourages to follow Kṛṣṇa. When their beloved Kṛṣṇa departed with His cows and friends, the Vrajavāsīs met with misfortune like a wife whose husband has gone abroad. They just stood still without speaking or moving. Remaining paralyzed, they soon became covered by the dust upraised by the cows’ hooves. Before He entered the forest, Kṛṣṇa turned around to observe the retinue of Vrajavāsīs behind Him. Kṛṣṇa stopped the procession to wait for His forlorn mother and father. Kṛṣṇa felt sorry for His crying mother and unhappy father who were in anxiety over His going to the forest. While all this was happening, Kṛṣṇa took special notice of the dancing eyes of Rādhikā. The sight of these intoxicated khañjanas (the humming birds of Rādhā’s eyes) made Kṛṣṇa think, “Today’s journey will be very auspicious and I will surely achieve My cherished goal.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.12-22
-L: Yaśodā instructs Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Yaśodā was deeply worried about her son’s safety. Feeling helpless, she tenderly rubbed Kṛṣṇa’s body with her hands while exclaiming: Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.24 “O tender boy! If You really want to go to the forest, then go, but we will follow You. Do not wander where we cannot see You! My son! Go where You usually go, but do not send us away! We know You cannot tolerate the heartache of Your well-wishers, who are burning in the fire of separation from You. “O ornament of our village! If You do not take us with You, our happy homes will forcefully swallow us and we will remain alive in vain. Do You want to hurt us by returning home only after nine long hours? If You do not want to come home soon, what shall we do? The soles of Your feet are more delicate than pink lotus petals, but the forest is filled with sharp sprouts, thorns and stones. Your body is as soft as a puppet made of butter sprinkled with liquid musk. The sun’s rays, however, are as sharp as poison and increasing in intensity at every moment. “The life airs of this unfortunate mother of Yours do not leave her body, but remain ruling with great cruelty. O my child! Let the cowherd boys or Nanda himself herd the cows. Oh my child! If You do not give up Your eagerness for cowherding, how can Your friends remain alive? “Kṛṣṇa, You have such tender limbs! Why were You born in a family of cowherd people, wherein

/Q: You must tolerate the pain of walking behind the grazing cows? With such a body, softened by the nectar of auspiciousness, You should have been born in a king’s family!” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 7.38- 46 Yaśodā scolded Nanda, “Under the scorching sun, the sand on which my son treads has become as hot as fire. Alas! Seeing His father sitting in his cool house made of gold bricks, His mother continues to live!” Yaśodā then criticized herself: “I have not died even after seeing the improper conduct of Kṛṣṇa’s father. Being very attentive to my household duties, why do I bear the name of “mother”? By praising such a shameless woman, people are actually condemning her!” Yaśodā turned toward Kṛṣṇa and said, “O child! All Your friends who have come to see You off have become as hard as thunderbolts! Nevertheless, You give them happiness because Your heart is as soft as a flower.” Kṛṣṇa accepted the words of His anguished mother like a crown on His head. He then revived Yaśodā by sprinkling her with the nectar of His moonlike smile. Kṛṣṇa humbly replied, “Mother! You have not seen the forest path. I feel no trouble at all in tending the cows. It is My greatest pleasure! We play in the dense, cool shade of the fragrant trees in the forest while happily watching the cows grazing near the Yamunā. I do not exert any effort in collecting the cows because I use My flute for that. “The foot paths do not trouble Me either because the camarī deer sweep them with their tails. The trees soften them with their streams of honey and provide shade like an umbrella. The musk deer perfume the paths as they wander about. With each step, I feel as if I am walking on a pillow. You are condemning the activity without understanding the facts. “With its cooling aromatic caves and groves filled with warbling cuckoos, dancing peacocks and humming bumblebees, with its many vines of colorful fragrant flowers swinging in the gentle breeze, and its many broad cascading waterfalls, Govardhana Hill enchants Our minds at every step. “O mother! The exhilaration I feel in Girirāja’s mountain caves far surpasses that of all your jeweled chambers. Here My friends decorate Me with flowers and ornaments as I lie down in great joy. Why are you unnecessarily lamenting?” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 7.58-68 Although saddened by Kṛṣṇa’s statements, Yaśodā lovingly fondled Kṛṣṇa and said, “O child! We have hundreds of servants to tend the cows. Why are You so insistent on herding the cows Yourself? You are just a tender child, yet You wander all day on rough roads without shoes or an umbrella. How can Your parents survive this thought?” Kṛṣṇa, feeling compassion for His grief stricken parents, replied to their desire that He use shoes and an umbrella: “According to scripture, herding cows is our natural occupation (dharma). The cows do not use shoes or umbrellas, therefore, we cowherds cannot use them. For us, this is faultless conduct. By following religious principles, one attains fame and long life. When one encounters fearful situations he will be protected if he has previously performed his prescribed duties. O mother, how can our duties be given up?” Kṛṣṇa’s parents felt boundless happiness to directly observe the good qualities of their son. Mother Yaśodā, however, remained anxious for Kṛṣṇa’s safety. Summoning the older sakhās, she said, “Subhadra! Mānḍalībhadra! Balabhadra! Listen boys! I am placing my tender, restless child under your care. You should always keep Kṛṣṇa by your side to instruct and protect Him. If He starts acting whimsically and refuses to obey your orders, you should immediately tell me. O Vijaya and others!

/Q: Please stay close to Kṛṣṇa and protect Him on all sides with your swords, bows and arrows. Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.25-33 ‘My child! If You see a ferocious wild animal while herding the cows in the forests or caves of Govardhana Hill, then meditate on Nārāyaṇa, the eternal Lord and He will protect You.’ As Kṛṣṇa listened to Yaśodā’s words, it was only with great difficulty that He prevented a smile from rising on His bimba-fruit lips. May that suppressed smile protect the three worlds. ’ Padyāvalī 149 As a form of protection, Mother Yaśodā lovingly touched all of Kṛṣṇa’s limbs while chanting mantras with the Lord’s name. For additional safety, Yaśodā tied a bejeweled Nṛsiṁha kavaca on Kṛṣṇa’s wrist. Kṛṣṇa bent down to touch His parents’ feet, saying, “O mother! O father! Please give Me permission to go!” Nanda and Yaśodā embraced Kṛṣṇa to their hearts and wet Him with their tears and the milk flowing from Yaśodā’s breasts. They kissed Kṛṣṇa, wiped His lotus face with their hands and smelled His head. Then in choked voice, they said, “O child! May Nṛsiṁha protect you! May the earth, the sky, the path, the forest and the ten directions bestow all auspiciousness! After blessing Kṛṣṇa, Nanda and Yaśodā embraced Him one last time while pleading, “Please come home safely!” Kṛṣṇa felt unlimited happiness upon receiving their permission to go. Nanda, Yaśodā, Rohiṇī, Ambā, Kilimbā and the cowherd men and women pampered Balarāma in the same way. Jubilant Kṛṣṇa sprinkled the thirsty cātaki birds of the gopīs’ eyes with a shower of sweet sidelong glances. The gopīs allowed Kṛṣṇa to go with their playful consenting glances. When Govinda went to the forest to herd the cows, He invited the hungry does of the gopīs’ minds to graze on the fresh sprouts of His personal handsomeness. Kṛṣṇa strongly bound those does with the chains of His passionate glances and dragged them into the forest.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.34-39
-L: Bidding farewel to the Vrajavāsīs
/Q: Śyāma requested and consoled the distressed Rādhā by conveying with His eyes, “O Sumukhī (beautiful-faced girl)! Be patient and do not grieve, for in one hour We shall unite. On some pretext, just slip away and meet Me on the banks of Your kuṇḍa.” Kṛṣṇa made His request with an afflicted heart and humble glances. Rādhikā, pretending to be both shy and arrogantly contrary, responded with a sidelong glance of assent to delight the heart of Kṛṣṇa. When the arrows of Rādhā-Mādhava’s glances fell from the sky and entered Their hearts, They experienced the utmost bliss and not the least bit of pain. This is the astonishingly inconceivable course of Rādhā-Mādhava’s love. Kṛṣṇa, in going to the forest, caught the fish of Rādhā’s mind in the net of His alluring beauty. And Rādhā trapped the swan of Kṛṣṇa’s yearning heart in the sturdy cage of Her amorous sidelong glances. Kṛṣṇa and His friends entered the forest while driving the cows before them and attracting the minds of the Vrajavāsīs behind them. Kṛṣṇa turned around and glanced toward His parents who were still following Him due to attachment. Kṛṣṇa stopped walking, faced His seniors and said, “O mother! Please return home at once and do not follow Me into the forest! Make some rasālā [yogurt mixed with sugar candy, black pepper, camphor and ghee] and quickly send it to Me. O father! Since My bat is broken, please go home and make five or six new ones so that We can play ball. O Mother! Look ahead! Although the cows are very hungry and thirsty, they are waiting for Me, turning their faces

/Q: towards Me to see what is the delay.” Yaśodā said, “O Child! At midday, I will send Your favorite edibles. Please eat them and quickly return home in the afternoon.” Kṛṣṇa said, “O mātā! If I hear that you both have taken your meals and are engaged happily at home, then I will eat everything you send Me. Otherwise, I will not come home!” Nanda and Yaśodā repeatedly kissed and embraced Kṛṣṇa while looking at Him with forlorn eyes. They desired nothing but Kṛṣṇa’s welfare with their bodies, minds and words. Kṛṣṇa bathed in the parental tears and breast milk of Nanda and Yaśodā. Meanwhile, the rising sun of imminent separation was scorching Kṛṣṇa’s beloved gopīs. Kṛṣṇa compassionately relieved them with the cooling waves of His sidelong glances. The gopīs drank the nectar of His bodily sweetness through the tubes of their lotus eyes. Although Kṛṣṇa felt sorry over the plight of the Vrajavāsīs, He left them behind and eagerly entered the forest to play with His friends. All the senses of the Vrajavāsīs turned into eyes as they beheld the all-attractive form of Kṛṣṇa. Their senses stopped functioning and they became stunned in dismay, however, when Kṛṣṇa disappeared from their vision. The villagers thought, “We are moving beings but the non-moving entities like trees are more fortunate because now they will enjoy Kṛṣṇa’s darśana!” When “the life of Vraja” left with His cows, the flowing rivers of the gopīs’ faces withered and dried up like rivers in the hot summer. The bees of the gopīs’ restless eyes immediately soared out of the wilted lotus flowers of their faces, but the swan of their lives got stuck in the mud of Kṛṣṇa’s separation. The voracious kingfisher birds of Kṛṣṇa’s eyebrows devoured the minnows of the gopīs’ discrimination floundering in the shallow waters of separation. The Vrajavāsīs, though completely devastated themselves, picked up Nanda and Yaśodā who were lying on the ground unconscious in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Together they unwillingly returned to their homes. Their bodies moved towards their homes merely out of habit, but their minds followed Kṛṣṇa into the forest. The assistant sakhīs revived their group leaders, who had fainted out of separation from Kṛṣṇa, and escorted them home in a mechanical way like one wooden puppet moving another.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.40-57
-L: Rādhā plans to meet Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Kundalatā, though heart broken herself, awakened Rādhikā and the other distressed sakhīs who had fainted and took them home. Since Kṛṣṇa had stolen their minds, the Vrajavāsīs were unaware of anything else. Their bodies executed their duties only out of habit. Thus they appeared like liberated souls, who, though free from the bodily demands, may still perform ordinary duties. Back in Yāvaṭ, Jaṭilā busied herself in the yard making cow dung patties while eagerly awaiting Rādhikā’s return from Nandagrama. As the sakhīs neared Yāvaṭ, Kundalatā quickly revived Rādhā from Her swoon by telling Her they were about to meet Kṛṣṇa. Kundalatā greeted Jaṭilā, “O noble woman! I offer respects to you. Here is your lovely auspicious daughter-in-law. I have so carefully protected Her that Kṛṣṇa did not even glance at Her shadow. Respected woman! Yaśodā was so pleased with Rādhā’s expert cooking that she gifted Her all these dazzling jeweled ornaments and costly clothes. The entire earth with all its oceans and continents

/Q: cannot equal the value of even one of these jewels. Even the heavenly queen Śaci, the wife of Indra, has never seen such amazingly divine ornaments studded with countless jewels.” Jaṭilā rejoiced to know that Kundalatā had protected Rādhā’s chastity, secured Yaśodā’s blessings and brought home vast wealth. Jaṭilā considered Kundalatā the right person to protect her self- interest. Jaṭilā said, “O my child Kundalatā! Come here! Are you feeling well? Your presence is very auspicious! Aha! I am pleased to see your affection for my daughter-in-law. I bless you to be the mother of seven illustrious sons! “Since you are chaste and bold, you can protect the chastity of others. I have as much faith in you as I have in myself. Paurṇamāsī, who knows the dharma-śāstras, has advised me that a faithful wife brings fame, sons, cows, wealth and long life to her husband. Thus, I am putting Rādhā in your care, for only you can protect Her chastity. “The holy men have declared that wealth and sense enjoyment come by following religious principles. It is true! I have practically seen that by engaging my daughter-in-law in religious acts, my son’s wealth has increased phenomenally. O child Kundalatā! For the welfare of my pious son Abhimanyu and the reputation of our spotless family, please engage Rādhā in Sūrya-pūjā by guiding Her in the proper procedures.” Jaṭilā turned to Rādhā and said, “O child! Bring a copper pot, milk from a red cow, ghee, yogurt, molasses, food cooked in ghee, red javā flowers, saffron, red sandalwood paste and a lotus garland. Go with Kundalatā and perform Sūrya-pūjā under the guidance of an expert brāhmaṇa or Gargī, the daughter of Gargācarya, and return home.” Jaṭilā said, “O Lalitā! You are an outspoken, chaste woman. Never let Rādhā pass from your sight, even for a moment. Most of all, I beg you with folded hands; do not let Rādhā catch even the faintest scent of that libertine, Nandānandana. Listen Kundalatā and Lalitā! The day is passing. Therefore, I place Rādhā in your care so I can finish my work of making cow dung patties without any worries.” With happy hearts, Lalitā and Kundalatā replied, “O respectable lady! Please rest assured that we shall diligently discharge the task you have given us. The two of us will protect Rādhā at every moment, just as the eyelids and eyelashes protect the eyes.” The splendidly shaped sakhīs, becoming intoxicated from drinking the sweet words of Jaṭilā, staggered a bit as they walked away. After gaining composure, then carefully took Rādhā to Her chambers and sat Her on a dais. Rādhā’s mañjarīs washed, dried and massaged Her lotus feet and fanned Her. Narmadā, a vana-sakhī sent by Vṛndā and Mālinī, arrived with baskets of budding jasmines surrounded by bees, as well as raṅgaṇa, karṇikā, bakula, pāṭalā, navamallikā jātī, campaka, nāgakeśara, lavaṅga flowers and lotuses. Rādhā, with the utmost artistic skill, perfumed the flowers with camphor and kṛṣṇa aguru. Then She strung a beautiful Vaijayantī garland, which would later appear as a colorful victory flag above the palace of amorous love known as Śyāma’s handsome body. Rādhā deftly rolled betel nuts, nutmeg, cardamom, camphor and catechu in a gold pān leaf for Kṛṣṇa’s tāmbūla. The tasty tāmbūla would enliven Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, color His moonlike face and arouse His affection because it was mixed with the sweet fragrance of Rādhā’s hands and Her heart’s passion. Lalitā said, “O Tulasī! Please take this garland and pān to Kṛṣṇa. Meet with Vṛndā and Subala and

/Q: quickly return with news of today’s saṅketa-kuñja (meeting place).” Tulasī carefully packed the tāmbūla and the garland before rushing off to meet Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā and Her talented sakhīs cooked some astounding amṛtakeli, karpūrakeli, laḍdus and other sweets to satisfy Kṛṣṇa’s mind and senses. Though Tulasī had gone to search for Her beloved and She Herself was absorbed in Kṛṣṇa’s service, still the cakorī bird of Rādhā’s heart intensely hankered to drink the sweet nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s moonlike face. Rādhikā felt every moment without Śyāma to be a million yugas.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 5.58-80
= P: Purvāhna-līlā (9:12 a.m.—10:00 a.m.)
-L: Description of Kṛṣṇa and His friends
/Q: One of Vṛndā’s vana-sakhīs met Rādhā, offered her respects and described how Kṛṣṇa was frolicking with His friends in the forest: “Kṛṣṇa held His flute in His left hand and ball of red powder (for playing Holi) in His right as He entered the forest. Subala and other close friends loudly sang improvisations on the vasanta rāga. While relishing their sweet singing, Kṛṣṇa moved His head in time with the tune. His lotus eyes rolled, lazy with the intoxication of love. Two friends walked beside Kṛṣṇa offering Him fresh tāmbūla wrapped in golden pān leaves. As Kṛṣṇa chewed the tāmbūla, His lips turned red from the drops of betel juice. Ānanda-vṛndavāna-campū 14.141-142 “Kṛṣṇa held the flute in His tender leaf-like left hand and an elegant stick in His right hand. He kept an enchanting panpipe (made from leaves) tucked in His belt. Kṛṣṇa sported a shiny peacock feather atop His splendid curly locks. An attractive guñja mala hung from Kṛṣṇa’s neck, sparkling rings adorned His fingers and water lilies dangled from His ears. Kṛṣṇa looked supremely attractive in His celebrated cowherd attire that defeated the beauty of all His costly jewels and ornaments. “When Kṛṣṇa ran along with the cowherd boys, the colorful Vaijayantī garland danced playfully on His chest, which was marked with the golden line of Lakṣmī. Kṛṣṇa preferred to wear Vraja’s natural flowers, berries, leaves and mineral powders offered by His boyfriends much more then the jeweled ornaments given by mother Yaśodā. “The young boys carried sticks on their left shoulders which had knapsacks of the best foods tied on the end. They looked magnificent with their flutes, panpipes and buffalo horns tucked in their belts. They wore guñja berry ear ornaments and peacock feathers in their topknots. Wrapped in yellow cloth, their thin waists looked dazzling and handsome. They wore armlets, bangles, earrings, necklaces, waist bells, ankle bells and jeweled belts tied with black strings looking like creepers. The boys did not like the articles offered by their mothers as much as the natural ornaments they collected from the forest while tending the cows.” Ānanda-vṛndavāna-campū 7.58-61 Vṛndā’s vana-sakhī merged her memory in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa’s beauty as He freely embraced His boy friends. Then for the pleasure of Rādhārāṇī she glorified the wonderful qualities of Kṛṣṇa’s friends and servants: “I take shelter of the lotus feet of Baladeva, whose intimate brotherly love for Kṛṣṇa is mixed with parental affection. Baladeva has a deep voice and a complexion as white as an autumn cloud. His arms are very long, touching His knees. Shimmering blue cloth adorns His body and golden earrings illuminate His cheeks. Baladeva’s ears are decorated with lotuses surrounded by bees, His forehead is decorated with musk tilaka and His broad chest is ornamented with a shining guñja necklace. Baladeva showed His immense strength by killing Pralambāsura. Let me take shelter

/Q: of the chivalrous Balarāma. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.28 “Maṇḍalībhadra, whose intimate brotherly love for Kṛṣṇa is mixed with parental affection, appears radiant with pink cloth decorating his shining limbs, a club in his hand, a peacock feather on his head and a shining complexion black as a bee. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.26 “I worship Śrīdāma, a dear bosom friend of Kṛṣṇa, who has yellow (greenish) cloth and a dark blue complexion, who holds a buffalo horn in his hand, who wears a copper colored turban and a nice flower garland on his neck. He always challenges Kṛṣṇa in joking friendship. Bhakti-rasāmṛta- sindhu 3.3.41 “I offer my respects to Subala, a most intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa who assists Kṛṣṇa’s conjugal pastimes. His complexion is just like molten gold. He wears yellow clothing, a pearl necklace and His beautiful eyes are just like blue lotus flower petals. By his talking and moral instructions, he gives joy to his friends. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.46 “I worship Ujjvala, a most intimate friend of Kṛṣṇa, who assists Kṛṣṇa’s conjugal pastimes. He has restless eyes and a dark blue complexion like Kṛṣṇa’s. He always wears orange cloth, spring flower decorations and a pearl necklace. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.48 “I am a follower of Raktaka, the personal servant of Kṛṣṇa. He dons yellow clothing and his bodily color is just like new grass. He is very expert in singing and is always engaged in serving Nandānandana. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.2.46 “I offer my obeisances to Kṛṣṇa’s servants, whose limbs glow with attractive jeweled ornaments, whose complexions are gold, white, reddish, brown or black like a bee and who are dressed just to suit their particular special bodily features.
/R: Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.2.43
-L: The Vṛndāvana forest and the boys’ sports
/Q: “Flowers beautifully decorated the forest of Vṛndāvana and many varieties of animals and birds filled it with sound. The peacocks and bees sang and the cranes and cuckoos cooed. Intending to engage in pastimes, Kṛṣṇa accompanied by Balarāma and surrounded by the cowherd boys and the cows entered the forest of Vṛndāvana as He played His flute. SB 10.18.7-8 “Kṛṣṇa looked over that forest, which resounded with the charming sounds of bees, animals and birds and which was enhanced by a lake whose clear water resembled the minds of great souls and by a breeze carrying the fragrance of hundred-petaled lotuses. Kṛṣṇa decided to enjoy the auspicious atmosphere. The primeval Lord saw that the stately trees, with their beautiful reddish buds and their heavy burden of fruits and flowers, were bending down to touch His feet with the tips of their branches. Thus, He smiled gently and addressed His elder brother: ‘O greatest of Lords, just see how these trees are bowing their heads at Your lotus feet, which are worshipable by the immortal demigods. The trees are offering You their fruits and flowers to eradicate the dark ignorance that has caused their birth as trees. O original personality, these bees must all be great sages and most elevated devotees of Yours, for they are worshiping You by following You along the path and chanting Your glories, which are themselves a holy place for the entire world. Though You have disguised Yourself within the forest, O sinless one, they refuse to abandon You, their worshipable Lord. ‘O worshipable one, these peacocks are dancing before You out of joy, these doe are pleasing You

/Q: with affectionate glances, just as the gopīs do and these cuckoos are honoring You with Vedic prayers. All these residents of the forest are most fortunate and their behavior toward You certainly befits great souls receiving another great soul at home. ‘The earth has now become most fortunate, because You have touched her grass and bushes with Your feet and her trees and creepers with Your fingernails and because You have graced her rivers, mountains, birds and animals with Your merciful glances. But above all, You have embraced the young cowherd women between Your two arms, a favor hankered after by the goddess of fortune herself.’ “Thus expressing His satisfaction with the beautiful forest of Vṛndāvana and its inhabitants, Kṛṣṇa enjoyed tending the cows and other animals with His friends on the banks of the river Yamunā below Govardhana Hill. Sometimes the honeybees in Vṛndāvana became so mad with ecstasy that they closed their eyes and began to sing. Kṛṣṇa, moving along the forest path with His cowherd boyfriends and Baladeva, would respond to the bees by imitating their singing while His friends sang about His pastimes. “Sometimes Kṛṣṇa would imitate the cooing of swans. Sometimes He vigorously imitated the dancing of a peacock, making His cowherd boyfriends laugh. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa would imitate the chattering of a parrot, sometimes, with a sweet voice, the call of a cuckoo. Sometimes, with a voice as deep as the rumbling of clouds, Kṛṣṇa would call out with great affection the names of the animals who had wandered far from the herd, thus enchanting the cows and the cowherd boys. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa would cry out in imitation of birds such as the cakoras, krauñcas, cakrāhvas, bhāradvājas and peacocks and sometimes Kṛṣṇa would run away with the smaller animals in mock fear of lions and tigers. “Decorating themselves with newly grown leaves, along with peacock feathers, garlands, clusters of flower buds and colored minerals, Balarāma, Kṛṣṇa and their cowherd friends danced, wrestled and sang. As Kṛṣṇa danced, some of the boys accompanied Him by singing and others by playing flutes, hand cymbals and buffalo horns, while still others praised His dancing. Sometimes the cowherd boys would play with bilva or kumbha fruits and sometimes with handfuls of āmalaka fruits. At other times, they would play the games of trying to touch one another or of trying to identify somebody while one is blindfolded and sometimes they would imitate animals and birds. SB 10.15.3-14 “They would sometimes jump around like frogs, sometimes play various jokes, sometimes ride in swings and sometimes imitate monarchs. In this way, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma played all sorts of well- known games as They wandered among the rivers, hills, valleys, bushes, trees and lakes of Vṛndāvana. SB 10.18.16 “Kṛṣṇa, who knows all sports and games, called together the cowherd boys and spoke as follows: “Hey cowherd boys! Let us play now! We will divide ourselves into two even teams. The cowherd boys chose Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma as the leaders of the two parties. Some of the boys were on Kṛṣṇa’s side and others joined Balarāma. The boys played various games involving carriers and passengers. In these games, the winners would climb up on the backs of the losers, who would have to carry them. “Thus carrying and being carried by one another and at the same time tending the cows, the boys followed Kṛṣṇa to a banyan tree known as Bhāṇḍīraka. Defeated, the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa carried Śrīdāmā. Bhadrasena carried Vṛṣabha and Pralamba carried Balarāma, the son of Rohiṇī.
/R: SB 10.18.19-24

/Q: “When his elder brother, fatigued from playing, would lie down with his head upon the lap of a cowherd boy, Lord Kṛṣṇa would help him relax by personally massaging his feet and offering other services. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa grew tired from fighting and lay down at the base of a tree, resting upon a bed made of soft twigs and buds and using the lap of a cowherd friend as His pillow. Some of the cowherd boys, who were all great souls, would then massage His lotus feet and others, qualified by being free of all sin, would expertly fan the Supreme Lord.” SB 10.15.15-17 Rādhā swooned in ecstasy hearing the description of Her beloved’s pastimes from Vṛndā’s vana- sakhī. Although momentarily stunned, Rādhā yearned to hear more about Kṛṣṇa and His friends.
-L: The forest welcomes Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Vṛndā’s vana-sakhī continued describing the all-attractive pastimes of Kṛṣṇa for the pleasure of Śrīmatī Rādhikā: “After resting a while, Kṛṣṇa desired to herd the cows because He understood that the cows sitting around Him were thirsty from eating grass. Śyāma sounded His flute and directed the cowherd boys to lead the cows to the Yamunā. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.68 “The cowherd boys strolled behind the cows. Some boys walked beside Kṛṣṇa and sang His glories. All the cows and boys received the same affection from Kṛṣṇa as they offered to Him, whether they were near Kṛṣṇa or far away. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.36 “What to speak of conscious beings, how can the earth describe the greatness of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, which distributed His sweetness and caused the jeweled ground to melt upon their touch? No living being at any time or in any way can ever measure the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s feet, marked clearly with the signs of a flag, lotus, barleycorn and other auspicious items. Who can describe the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet when He placed them lovingly upon the breast of mother earth? Catching a whiff of that fragrance, the bees rejected the forest flowers and buzzed around Kṛṣṇa’s feet without any inhibition or hesitation. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.40-41 “As soon as they heard Govinda’s flute, the inert entities started singing and the vocal entities fell silent. River waves froze and ceased their movement; immobile objects started moving and solid objects turned to liquid. Kṛṣṇa’s flute song thus reversed the functions of nature. The world danced in wonderful ways when Sri Kṛṣṇa pressed His flute to His bimba fruit lips and played the fifth note. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.37 “The ambrosial song of Kṛṣṇa’s flute radically altered the nature of every entity in Vṛndāvana. The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute made non-moving objects tremble. It stunned the mobile creatures, melted stones into liquid, silenced the birds, brought bumps of ecstasy to the vines, made the creepers burst forth with new shoots as hair standing on end, faded the color of the flowers and caused them to drop tears of nectar. In this way, Vṛndāvana became glorious with sāttvika-bhāvas (eight transformations in divine love). “The forest of Vṛndāvana exhibited the sweet opulence of her natural splendor in order to welcome Kṛṣṇa; The sounds of birds joyfully warbling in the fifth note and the indistinct buzzing of the bees’; The sweet juice of ripe mangos and other fruits dripping on the ground; And the rich fragrance of the lotus flowers blooming in the lakes and the cooling breezes teaching the creepers to gently sway like lady dancers. All these combined to satisfy the senses of Govinda. “Just as a wealthy man receives a dignified guest, the trees welcomed Kṛṣṇa by smiling with their blossoming flowers; singing with their swarms of bees; dancing with their fluttering leaves, and offering a beverage of dripping honey and a meal of fresh fruits. The creepers in their soft leafy dresses danced for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa while the singing bee minstrels repeatedly kissed their smiling flower faces.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 6.14-19
-L: Kṛṣṇa sees Rādhā everywhere
/Q: “The mellifluous music of His muralī pulled the grazing deer to Mādhava’s side. Śyāma’s heart surged with thoughts of Rādhikā’s beautiful, enchanting eyes when He saw their moist elongated eyes. The peacocks became intoxicated with love upon seeing Kṛṣṇa, and then danced madly for His pleasure. Their fanned tail feathers reminded Murāri of Rādhā’s glistening braid, which loosens during Their love play. “As Kṛṣṇa passed a lake, He mistook the happy chattering of the caṭakī birds for Rādhā’s armlets, the warbling of the swans for Her bracelets and the call of cranes for Her ankle bells. Kṛṣṇa, in His bewilderment, thought that Rādhā had arrived. While gazing at a fragrant, blooming golden lotus flower covered by bumblebees, Kṛṣṇa’s fantasy increased as the restless eyes of Rādhā’s golden lotus face appeared before Him. “Seeing the ripe bael, orange, citron and pomegranate fruits as He wandered from one kuñja to another kindled Kṛṣṇa’s fascination for the beautiful raised breasts of Rādhikā. Thus mesmerized, Kṛṣṇa saw Rādhā’s transcendental form everywhere. This is not so surprising! Actually, the forest of Vṛndāvana deliberately manifested Rādhārāṇī’s attributes just to please Kṛṣṇa. “Hari became inflamed with love for Rādhikā by beholding Her in every object of the forest. He could not steady His mind any more. Kṛṣṇa’s heart was like a kāśa flower caught in a whirlwind of conflicting emotions. Kṛṣṇa brought the hungry cows to graze in a valley beside Govardhana Hill. Then He played with His intimate friends to keep His mind from meditating on Rādhikā.
/R: Govinda- līlāmṛta 6.20-29
-L: Dhaniṣṭhā’s news and Kṛṣṇa’s water sports
/Q: “Suddenly Dhaniṣṭhā and some maidservants arrived from Nandagrāma bringing Lalitā’s delicious, ghee fried foods and Yaśodā’s rasalā drink prepared in the morning. “Kṛṣṇa happily greeted her, ‘O Dhaniṣṭhā! Have My mother and father bathed timely, offered pūjā, satisfied their subordinates and dined cheerfully with the family members?’ “Dhaniṣṭhā replied, ‘Yes, for Your welfare they bathed, worshiped the Lord and distributed abundant charity to the brāhmaṇas. After taking their meal, they sent this snack for You and Your friends.’ “The creeper of Kṛṣṇa’s mind intensely yearned to climb the tree of Rādhā’s association. Kṛṣṇa thought that Dhaniṣṭhā would now fulfill this desire. Sounding His flute, Śyāma collected the scattered cows and directed them to Manasa Gaṅgā. The cowherd boys pushed the cows into Manasa Gaṅgā so that they could drink the cool, clear sweet water. Afterwards, the boys drank some water and sported in the water for a long time. Govinda-līlāmṛta 6.31-37 “Kṛṣṇa and His friends tried to defeat each other in water splashing. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa, who was a most expert player, would win and sometimes He enjoyed His own defeat. Occasionally, Kṛṣṇa dove under water and hid His face amongst the blue lotus flowers so that no one could see Him. When the cowherd boys searched everywhere and could not find Kṛṣṇa, their very life and soul, they became seized with grief and wept loudly.

/Q: “Kṛṣṇa laughed as He emerged from a patch of lotuses and then rejoined His astonished friends, whose eyes opened wide in a flood of happiness. Together they enjoyed various games. Afterwards, they decorated each other with water flower garlands strung on lotus stems. Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.7.46-51 “The cowherd boys said, ‘Let me do it first! Let me do it first!’ while competing to decorate Kṛṣṇa with various colorful forest ornaments according to their taste. “Kṛṣṇa said, ‘My dear friends! Just see the beauty of the riverbank with its pleasing atmosphere. And notice how the blooming lotuses are attracting bees and birds by their aroma. Their humming and chirping is echoing throughout the beautiful trees in the forest. The sand here is soft and clean, therefore, this is the best place for our sporting pastimes. I think we should take our lunch here, since we are hungry and it is already late. The calves can drink water and ramble here and there eating grass.’ “Like the whorl of a lotus flower surrounded by its petals and leaves, Kṛṣṇa sat in the center, encircled by lines of His friends, who all looked very beautiful. Every boy looked toward Kṛṣṇa, thinking that Kṛṣṇa might look toward Him. In this way, they all enjoyed their lunch in the forest.
/R: SB 10.13.5-8
-L: Picnic and Kusuma Sarovara meeting
/Q: “Among the cowherd boys, some placed their lunch on flowers, some on leaves, fruits, or bunches of leaves, some actually in their baskets, some on the bark of trees and some on rocks. This is what the children imagined to be their plates as they ate their lunch. SB 10.13.9 “Kṛṣṇa is yajña-bhuk—that is, He eats only offerings of yajña—but to exhibit His childhood pastimes, He now sat with His flute tucked between His waist and His tight cloth on His right side and with His horn bugle and cow-driving stick on His left. Holding in His hand a very nice preparation of yogurt and rice, with pieces of suitable pickle between His fingers, He sat like the whorl of a lotus flower, looking forward toward all His friends, personally joking with them and creating jubilant laughter among them as He ate. At that time, the denizens of heaven were watching, struck with wonder at how the Personality of Godhead, who eats only in yajña, was now eating with His friends in the forest. SB 10.13. 1 “Kṛṣṇa took ācamana and chewed some fragrant betel nuts mixed with camphor which came from Nandagrāma. He also chewed betel nuts and nāgavallī leaves fresh from the forest.” Bṛhad- bhāgavatāmṛta 2.7.62 Rādhikā became overwhelmed and fell unconscious after hearing all the wonderful talks about Kṛṣṇa from Vṛndā’s vana-sakhī. One sakhī revived Rādhā by holding a garland under Her nose that was saturated with Kṛṣṇa’s bodily aroma. Another sakhī narrated some pastimes of Kṛṣṇa that she had heard from Vṛndā: “Kṛṣṇa told the cowherd boys, ‘You go ahead and herd the cows with Balarāma. Subala, Madhumaṅgala and I will wander about looking at the beauty of the spring forest.’ “Simultaneously, Dhaniṣṭhā told her maidservants, ‘Please take the empty containers and serving utensils back to Nandagrāma. I will meet you after picking flowers for worshiping Lord Nārāyaṇa.’ “Vṛnda then arrived and placed two fragrant campaka flowers, suitable for ear ornaments, in Kṛṣṇa’s

/Q: hands. Seeing the golden campaka flowers, Kṛṣṇa started trembling as He remembered the glowing complexion of Rādhā. Madhumaṅgala took the flowers from the stunned hand of Kṛṣṇa and hung them over His ears. “Kṛṣṇa took counsel from Vṛndā, Dhaniṣṭhā, Subala and Madhumaṅgala, who were experts in the six military arts (sandhi: making allies, yāna: marching, asana: waiting for the opponent to assemble, vigraha: attacking the opponent, dvaidha: scattering the opponent and āśraya: surrendering). Utilizing their advice, Kṛṣṇa planned how to conquer the kingdom of Rādhā’s lovely divine body. Kṛṣṇa then clasped Madhumaṅgala’s hand and walked to Kusuma Sarovara with Vṛndā, Dhaniṣṭhā and Subala. “The charming banks of Kusuma Sarovara were dotted with secluded kuñjas full of creepers and flowering trees. The pleasant songs of the swans and cranes gliding on the water enhanced the picturesque environment. Although breathtaking, the scenery simply increased Kṛṣṇa’s eagerness to meet Rādhā more and more. “Kṛṣṇa revealed His mind to His ministers, saying, ‘Listen, if I send Vṛndā, Subala or Madhumaṅgala to bring Rādhā, Jaṭilā will certainly become suspicious, argue with them and forcibly keep Rādhā at home. On the other hand, if I play My attracting flute, all the gopīs will quickly assemble here. Then how will I attain Rādhā’s association amongst the intense competition of pride, jealousy and contrary natures which will arise among the gopīs?’ “Kṛṣṇa Himself solved the problem, saying, ‘O Dhaniṣṭhā! Go meet Kundalaṭā. She is always favorable to Me and Jaṭilā trusts Kundalatā implicitly. Therefore, she can easily fool Jaṭilā and bring Rādhā to Me.’ “Vṛndā agreed with Śyāma’s proposal saying, ‘Yes, that is a splendid idea! In the meantime, if one of Rādhā’s sakhīs comes here to pick flowers, we can immediately get news of Rādhā.’
/R: Govinda- līlāmṛta 5.39-49
-L: Tulasī brings news of Rādhā
/Q: “Tulasī and Kastūṛī-mañjarī suddenly arrived. They felt happy seeing Vṛṇdā, Dhaniṣthā, Subala and Madhumaṅgala planning with Kṛṣṇa on how to meet Rādhā. Everyone there knew that even in dreams Tulasī never leaves Rādhā’s side. Therefore, they were overjoyed to see her, thinking that Rādhā must be nearby. Kṛṣṇa anxiously scanned the path that Tulasī had traversed with His restless eyes. “Jubilant Tulasī handed a Vaijayantī garland to Madhumaṅgala and some betel nuts to Subala, which she took from a small gem-studded case. The garland, surrounded by a swarm of bees, was wonderfully fashioned with the greatest artistry. Its natural fragrance was enhanced by the touch of Rādhā’s divine hands. Hari’s mind pulsated with intense love for Rādhā upon beholding the garland. “Kṛṣṇa’s bodily hair stood erect in delight when Madhumaṅgala, laughing all the while, draped the garland around His neck. As soon as Kṛṣṇa contacted the garland, He experienced the lingering touch of Rādhā’s delicate hand. Kṛṣṇa thought that perhaps Rādhā had come and was hiding in a nearby grove as a joke. Kṛṣṇa felt dazed by the desire to see Rādhikā’s gorgeous moonlike face. Then Kṛṣṇa chatted with the beaming Tulasī. “Kṛṣṇa said, ‘Is your sakhī Rādhā happy and well?’ Tulasī replied, ‘Because You are Her master, Rādhā is always happy!’

/Q: Kṛṣṇa: ‘Where is Rādhā now?’ Tulasī: ‘She is at home.’ Kṛṣṇa: ‘Isn’t Rādhā coming to the forest today?’ Tulasī: ‘No! Rādhā is doing various chores at home under Jaṭilā’s order.’ Kṛṣṇa: ‘What chores has Rādhā done?’ Tulasī: ‘Rādhā, being absorbed in thoughts of Your love, became absent minded and tried to churn butter from a pot of water!’ Kṛṣṇa: ‘What happened then?’ Tulasī: ‘Jaṭilā noticed Rādhā’s mistake, scolded Her severely and locked Her in the house.’ Kṛṣṇa: ‘Listen, just make a plan with Vṛndā to deceive Jaṭilā and quickly bring Rādhā here.’ Tulasī: ‘Jaṭilā cannot be fooled so easily.’ Kṛṣṇa: ‘Alas! Curses on My fate!’ “Kṛṣṇa, misled by Tulasī’s teasing words and tortured by the attack of Cupid, fell into depression over the difficulty in meeting Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Mādhava mused, ‘Will the matchless beauty named Rādhā, with a complexion more attractive than the bud of a ketakī flower growing on a golden mountain, ever decorate My chest, dark as a rain cloud?’ “Tulasī also felt sad by Kṛṣṇa’s despondency. Vṛndā and Dhaniṣṭhā passed some menacing looks toward Tulasī, who humbly addressed Kṛṣṇa again, ‘O Gokulānanda! Cheer up! Please forgive Me. I was only joking. Cast away all Your misfortune. Your beloved Rādhā is almost here!’ “Kṛṣṇa rejoiced over the news of Rādhā’s imminent arrival. Then He removed the two campaka flowers from His ears and gave them to Tulasī, saying, ‘O Tulasī! Where is Rādhā? Where is She hiding? If you say Rādhā is angry, I will reply that I have not done anything wrong. If you say Rādhā is playing a joke, I will say that such joking does not befit My depressed state. Please show Me My beloved immediately!’ “Tulasī, who is an expert judge of time and circumstance, assessed Kṛṣṇa’s mood and replied accordingly to soothe Kṛṣṇa’s yearning heart. Tulasī said, ‘O lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa! You should rest assured that Your Priyatama loves You dearly and also longs to behold Your handsome face. Dispatched by Jaṭilā, Rādhā and Kundalatā are coming here to perform Sūrya-pūjā. Rādhā sent me ahead to discern Your location. Please tell me to which pleasure grove I should bring Rādhā?’ “Kṛṣṇa delighted in her words and sighed with relief. He rewarded Tulasī with His guñja necklace. Vṛndā looked deeply into Kṛṣṇa’s eyes to discern His dearest desire and then told it to Tulasī: ‘Immediately bring Rādhā to Kandarpa-keli-sukhada kuñja on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. O sakhī! I am very eager to arrange for Rādhā-Mādhava’s upcoming pastimes, therefore, I will go with you to Rādhā-kuṇḍa.’
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 6.50-66
-L: Śaibya-sakhī deceived
/Q: “Meanwhile, Candrāvalī was waiting at her rendezvous place while her trusted sakhī Śaibyā came before Kṛṣṇa to take Him there. However, Śaibyā became very disturbed upon seeing Vṛndā and Tulasī, who was wearing the guñja necklace previously given to Kṛṣṇa by Candrāvalī. Śaibyā surmised that Rādhā must be nearby since Her confidential sakhī Tulasī was there conversing with

/Q: Vṛndā. “Śaibyā was extremely agitated however, she spoke cunningly to Tulasī: ‘O Tulasī! Candrāvalī has sent me to invite Rādhā to her celebration of Durgā-pūjā. However, I could not find Rādhā anywhere, either at Her home or in the forest. By good fortune, I am meeting you. Please tell me Rādhā’s whereabouts?’ “Tulasī perceived Śaibyā’s deceit and decided to outwit her. Employing the logic of ‘cheating a cheater,’ Tulasī cleverly replied, ‘Śyāmā-sakhī has taken Rādhā to observe the Ambikā festival in her home. When we got there, however, Śyāmā-sakhī engaged us in arranging the function. For this reason, Lalitā sent me here to bring Vṛndā. Now we are going to Śyāmā’s home after collecting fruits, flowers and garlands.’ “Thus duping the crafty Śaibyā, Tulasī acted apathetically towards Kṛṣṇa and abruptly left with Vṛndā and Dhanisṭhā. Kṛṣṇa, to support Tulasī, also showed indifference towards her. Kṛṣṇa encouraged Śaibyā with His eyes to wait until Tulasī had gone out of sight. Kṛṣṇa said, ‘O Śaibyā! Now, tell me about your priyā-sakhī? Where is My dearest Candrāvalī and what is she doing?’ “Śaibyā excitedly replied, ‘O Kṛṣṇa! Though Candrāvalī was locked at home by her mother-in-law, I have brought her here on the pretext of Durgā worship. Now she is anxiously waiting for You at Sakhī-sthalī along with Padmā-sakhī and the others. They sent me out to find You.’ “Although internally disappointed, quick-witted Kṛṣṇa feigned joy outside and delighted Śaibyā with His deceptive words: ‘O sakhī! I am intensely eager to meet Candrāvalī. You can fulfill My desire by bringing her to Gaurī Tīrtha, where our elders cannot interfere. My cows are grazing in the forest named Pramada-rādhā. Please keep Candrāvalī waiting at Gaurī Tīrtha until I can get free from My duties there.’ “Deceiving Śaibyā, Kṛṣṇa left with Subala and Madhumaṅgala to find the cows. Śaibyā happily hurried back to Candrāvalī.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 6.67-86
= P: Purvāḥna-līlā (10:00 a.m.—10:48 a.m.)
-L: Rūpa-mañjarī describes Rādhā’s anguish
/Q: The sakhī continued describing Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes to Rādhikā: “Lalita sent a few clever sakhīs to Govardhana Hill. They arrived there unseen, and became very happy to smell the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s garland. Kṛṣṇa met them in a secluded place and inquired about Kiśorī, the crest jewel of all young girls. “Rūpa-mañjarī, who is a reservoir of matchless elegance and a jewel mine of good qualities, said, ‘O king of lovers! The soil of the forest has become beautified by the embrace of Your feet. Now Rādhā is challenging that beauty by embracing the soil of the pastures. O Hari! You have given the forest a blue sapphire color by offering it Your complexion. Since the creator could not change that color, he simply mixed it with the golden color of Rādhā’s complexion (making it green). ‘O life of Vraja! The trees and forest animals are weeping upon seeing Your face covered with the dust raised by the cows. Today Rādhā is rolling in that dust and making Her friends weep. The two lotus flowers of Rādhā’s eyes are now bearing water in the form of tears. Though inconceivable, water now comes from the lotus flowers (of Rādhā’s eyes). Although normally lotuses come from the water. A similar case was with Kardama Muni (kardama: mud), who was the son of Brahma (born

/Q: from a lotus), although lotuses normally grow from the mud! ‘Rādhā’s hair, clothing and garland are all most excellent (sādhu), but now they are loosened. In a country without a king, even a saint (sādhu) will act loosely. We try to console Rādhā by telling Her that You feel very happy walking barefoot through the forest, so She need not lament. Not believing our words however, Rādhā simply releases long, hot sighs. When a sakhī utters the phrase, “there are no rough stones or sharp thorns in the forest,” as soon as Rādhā hears the words “rough stones” or “sharp thorns” She wails loudly and swoons. ‘We then break Rādhā’s swoon by holding Your fragrant prasādi flower garland under Her nose while saying false things like, “Hey Rādhā, Your Priyatama has come! Get up and look at Him!” Rādhā immediately regains consciousness and becomes excited thinking that You have arrived. ‘At that time, Rādhikā asks, “O sakhī! Where is that best of dancers, who makes the wagtail birds of His eyes dance seductively?” Sakhī: “Rādhā! He is hiding in Your house.” Rādhā: “Are you deceiving Me?” Sakhī: “Rādhā! Why should I deceive You? You are smelling the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s body. Isn’t that proof that I speak the truth?” “Rūpa-mañjarī continued describing Rādhā’s condition of separation to Kṛṣṇa: ‘Rādhikā suddenly gained faith by that and became happy. Cupid could not tolerate that however, so he forcibly shot Rādhā with his five arrows. Her limbs trembled and broke out in a sweat. Rādhā then collapsed on the earth, sprinkling Her body with Her tears. When Rādhā searched for You in Her home, She could not find the nectarean rays from the moon of Your lovely face to satisfy Her thirsty cakorī eyes. ‘At that time, Rādhā spoke to Herself, “O mind! Why did you vainly take the sakhīs’ false (anrita) words to be just like nectar (amṛta)? Because of that Your affliction has doubled!” Rādhā fell to the ground again. After a few moments, Rādhā stood up and moaned, “O afflicted life of Mine, in the absence of your friend you are condemned!” Though Rādhā repeatedly cursed Her own life, its burden did not become lighter in the slightest, rather it became heavier. ‘Please listen, O dear most of Rādhā! Out of separation from You, fair-browed Rādhikā has become so emaciated and fragile that She cannot even tolerate the blowing of Her life airs, what to speak of the breeze from fanning Her.’ “After Madhusūdana heard everything about His beloved from Rūpa-mañjarī, He became very upset and His voice choked up. With His eyes, flooding with tears of love, Kṛṣṇa communicated to Madhumaṅgala: “You speak on My behalf.” “Madhumaṅgala said, ‘Rūpa-mañjarī, quickly bring that golden lotus named Rādhikā to the forest. Otherwise, out of the forest, what will be Her fate? And what will become of Madhusūdana if He cannot drink Her honey?’ “Mādhava removed the campaka garland from His neck and gave it to Rūpa-mañjarī, saying, ‘Let this campaka garland lie on the chest of My Priyaji!’ Rūpa-mañjarī swiftly returned to Rādhā, hung the garland around Her neck and filled Her ears with the nectarean news of Her Priyatama. Rādhā’s devastation dissipated immediately by embracing Her lover’s fragrance lingering on His garland. However, when Rādhā heard that in Her separation Kṛṣṇa

/Q: was suffering as much as if He had been bitten of a nest of scorpions, Rādhā experienced the searing pain of that poison in Her own body. Thus Her joy disappeared.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 8.6-27
-L: Rādhā goes to Rādhā-kuṇḍa
/Q: Kṛṣṇa, longing to meet His lover Rādhikā, walked along a hidden path leading to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Govinda-līlāmṛta 7.1 The fresh, attractive groves surrounding Rādhā-kuṇḍa were unparalleled in their profound beauty and wealth of colorful flowers blooming blissful, jewel creepers. One grove featured an excellent highly ornamented bed, surrounded by pleasing items for the pleasure of Rādhā-Mādhava. Every inch of Rādhā-kuṇḍa was saturated with absolute bliss. The beautiful lake in the middle of the groves was always filled with sweet, clear water. Verily, it was the form of condensed euphoria. Four gem-studded banks adorned with jeweled bathing ghāṭas surrounded the lake. Regal kadamba trees kept the banks cool and fresh. The lake had varying depths to serve the whims of Rādhā-Mādhava. The lake supplied a variety of tastes in different places for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. Astonishing lotuses and water lilies opened and closed continuously. The beautiful forest groves flanking the lake reflected in its waters glowing with the color of various gems. Vṛndāvana-mahimāmrṭa 4.106-108 The magnificence of Rādhā-kuṇḍa was further enhanced by the fragrance of countless blossoming water lilies, lotuses, blue lotuses and night lotuses, along with the joyous playing and sweet warbling of swans, cranes, ducks and pairs of cakravākas. Hundreds of swarms of bees buzzed in all directions around the lake. Vṛndāvana-mahimāmrṭa 3.103 On the four sides of Rādhā-kuṇḍa were platforms with steps leading down to the water. The pair of trees standing beside each platform supported a wonderful swing, richly decorated with flowers and fine cloth. The swings were suspended from bakula trees in the north, kadamba—east, campaka— south and mango—west. There was a picturesque footbridge on pillars in the south corner of Rādhā- kuṇḍa, which extended east to Śyāma-kuṇḍa. The waters of both kuṇḍas mixed under the bridge. Govinda-līlāmṛta 7.4-6 Gardens of mādhavi creepers beautified the four corners of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which were surrounded on all sides with groves of reeds, nāgakeśara and aśoka trees. The many shade trees and creepers around Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which were bending over from the weight of their abundant fruits and flowers, had jeweled platforms around their bases. These platforms had unusual steps that were very comfortable to sit on because they were warm in the winter and cool in the summer. Each platform had a unique size and shape. Some extended up to the knees and others to the navel, chest or neck. Some platforms were square, round, six, seven or eight-sided. The glossy, polished gem surfaces of the platforms appeared like waves of water. Foolish birds, attempting to quench their thirst, often mistook them for water and collided into them. Rādhā-Mādhava always sat on these fabulous platforms talking and joking with Their sakhīs. Groves of densely foliated, flowering trees embraced by creepers bearing clusters of flowers covered the flat area around the platforms. The expansive groves of the various sakhīs were just beyond these trees. There were patches of banana trees full of cooling leaves and bunches of ripe and unripe fruits. Next were flower gardens surrounded by fruit orchards. A dazzling jeweled temple, connected to the northern shore by a bridge, sat on an island in the middle of Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

/Q: The good qualities of each season continually served the groves around Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Vṛndā and Her maidservants regularly swept the paths, courtyards and forest cottages and sprinkled them with scented water. The many kuñja gates and roofs of flowers, and the flower bedecked archways, swings, courtyards and platforms added to the celestial atmosphere. Comfortable flowerbeds situated on the soft earth waited inside the pastime cottages. The beds were made in layers beginning with leaves, and then lotus petals topped with a layer of soft, stem-less fragrant flowers. Scattered around the beds were flower pillows and cushions shaped like the moon. Goblets full of honey wine, boxes full of betel nuts and sweets, and golden jugs of fresh cool drinking water sat on tables next to the beds. Govinda-līlāmṛta 7.4-17 The bowers resounded with the incredibly sweet singing of myna birds and affectionate parrots discussing the intimate pastimes of Rādhā-Mādhava. The cuckoos pleased everyone with their sweet “Kuhū, kuhū.” The madly dancing peacocks and the tumultuous joyful warbling of flocks of birds further enhanced the charm of the groves. Vṛndāvana-mahimāmrṭa 4.105 As soon as the pigeons, turtledoves and cātakas saw Kṛṣṇa, their bodies swelled in joy and they enlivened the forest of Rādhā-kuṇḍa with their happy chirping, which sounded like nectar for the ears. The wise cakora birds rejecting the feeble splendor of the moon, preferred to drink the nectarean moonlight of Kṛṣṇa’s lovely face, which defeated countless full moons. The banks and the water of Rādhā-kuṇḍa manifested wonderful splendor to assist Rādhā-Mādhava’s confidential pastimes. The abundant trees and creepers in the groves around Rādhā-kuṇḍa were bending over from the weight of their buds, flowers, new leaves, unripe, half-ripe and ripened fruits. Seeing the clusters of white lotus flowers in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, one could conjecture that the kuṇḍa was laughing at the inferior beauty of the ocean of milk. Next to Rādhā-kuṇḍa was a lake named Śyāma- kuṇḍa created by the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus foot. The kuñjas of Rādhā’s eight chief sakhīs (Lalitā, Viśākhā, Raṅgadevī etc.) began in the north and continued to the northwest of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. With great love, the sakhīs diligently decorated the kuñjas with their own hands to serve the pastimes of Rādhā-Mādhava. Small groves, craft rooms and artistically landscaped gardens bisected by narrow lanes lined by rows of shady trees extended outwards from the kuñjas. The lanes were made of pure crystal studded with blue sapphires, creating the effect of little creeks with small waves. The gates and walls separating the various kuñjas were inlaid with such astonishing jewel work that a wall was easily mistaken for a door and a door mistaken for a wall.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 7.22-30
-L: Description of Lalitānanda-kuñja
/Q: The huge, lightning colored kuñja of Lalitā-sakhī, located on the north side of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, had eight sub kuñjas resembling an eight-petaled lotus flower. An astonishing courtyard named Anaṅga- raṅgāmbuja (the lotus of conjugal pastimes) was situated in the middle of all the kuñjas. The courtyard was shaped like a thousand-petaled lotus whose lovely whorl was a glittering golden platform, which could expand or contract depending on the pastime. The pleasing opulence of all six seasons was always present here to increase the happiness of Rādhā-Mādhava. Kalāvatī, Lalitā’s disciple, carefully cleaned and maintained the area, the abode of sweet pastimes. Lalitānanda-da Kuñja (gives bliss to Lalitā) was like a splendid royal pavilion for Rādhā-Mādhava, the lords of the bowers and Their beloved sakhīs. From the air, Lalitānanda-da Kuñja appeared like a huge lotus with a nucleus of pure gold from which expanded filaments made of jewels. Each petal

/Q: seemed to be made of different colored gemstones. Surrounding the nucleus, the petals were uniform in size and shape. But the number and size of the petals increased with each successive circle. A golden lotus temple, which could satisfy the senses with its cooling radiance, sat in the center of the nucleus. Outside there were five successive circles of wonderful golden platforms. The first circle of platforms was made of gold, the second—cat’s eye gems, the third—blue sapphires, the fourth— crystals and the fifth—rubies. The domes above the platforms contained jeweled pictures of mating deer, birds, humans and demigods to arouse erotic passion. Desire trees with green, yellow, white, red and blue leaves and flowers surrounded the golden lotus temple. The branches of the trees met overhead to from natural canopies. The inside dome of the temple was carved in the shape of a thousand-petaled lotus. The jeweled platform under the dome was two feet high. In the northeast sector of Lalitānanda-da Kuñja was a sub kuñja named Vasanta-sukha-da Kuñja (gives the joy of spring). The beautiful bower had eight sections resembling an eight-petaled lotus flower. Aśoka trees having intertwining branches full of beautiful white, green, blue, yellow and crimson flowers covered the entire area. Buzzing bees and cooing cuckoos surcharged the atmosphere. The Padma-mandira, the lotus temple made of unlimited types of rare gems, stood in the southwest corner of Lalitānanda-da Kuñja. It had doors and windows on all four sides and jewel-studded paintings of Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā, pūrva-rāga and nikuñja-keli pastimes on its inside walls. Colorful paintings of Kṛṣṇa killing the demons from Pūtana to Ariṣṭāsura lined the outside walls. Lalitā-sakhī painted and hung the pictures. The jeweled center of the lotus temple emanated a brilliant effulgence. Sixteen rooms shaped like lotus petals adjoined the center. These rooms also had sixteen sub-chambers. The second floor design was the same. The third floor was a wall-less room topped by a great-jeweled dome supported by coral pillars on crystal bases. Jugs, flags and cakras ornamented the dome. Rādhā-Śyāma enjoyed the spectacular panorama of Rādhā-kuṇḍa from this high open-air room. The ground floor contained many enchanting pictures finely crafted from precious jewels. Gem- studded staircases connected the rooms and sub rooms. Trees full of fruits and flowers flanked the stairways. Rādhā-Mādhava relished many intimate pastimes in the lotus temple. A large, lotus-shaped, jeweled swing sat in the southeastern corner of Lalitānanda-da Kuñja. It was suspended from two old bakula trees that joined overhead like an umbrella. The swing, named Madanāndolana (Cupid’s Swing), had eight ruby seats with eighteen inch high lotus-shaped backrests made of coral. The swing, hanging on four thick silk ropes, was three feet off the ground. The nucleus of the swing had two circles, each having eight lotus petals. Unique lotus petal shaped footrests extended below the seats. The swing had eight doors on the inside and two on the outside for entering and leaving. Two jeweled pillars in the center of the lotus swing acted as backrests for Rādhā-Mādhava. Round pillows and bolsters arrayed on cotton mattresses covered with expensive silk bedspreads sat on the swings. A beautiful canopy decorated with jewels, strings of pearls, embroidered imitation moons and golden and multicolored cloth hung above Rādhā-Mādhava’s heads. The eight main sakhīs sat around Rādhā- Mādhava as Vṛndā pushed the swing and other sakhīs sang jhulana (swing pastime) bhajans.

/Q: Although every sakhī on the swing faced Rādhā-Mādhava from a different direction, each one felt that the Divine Couple was directly smiling at her. A mādhavi grove named Mādhavānanda-da (gives bliss to Mādhava) adorned the northeast corner of Lalitā’s kuñja. A large network of mādhavi vines standing erect like cranes filled the area. The grove was shaped like an eight-petaled lotus with its sub kuñjas. Sitāmbuja Kuñja (white lotus), which was filled with blooming nāgakeśara trees and hanging mallikā vines, stood north of Lalitā’s kuñja. The whorl of the lotus was made of gold studded with moonstones and its filaments were made of jewels. The kuñja was surrounded by similar lotus shaped kuñjas. On the eastern side of Lalitā’s kuñja there was a blue lotus bower named Asitāmbhuja, decorated with excellent blue sapphires and filled with tamāla trees embraced by blooming golden creepers. The eight smaller groves surrounding it had golden whorls. On the southern side was the bower named Aruṇāmbuja (pink lotus), whose inner and outer portions were made of rubies. It was covered by blossoming clove creepers. The western side featured the bower named Hemāmbuja (golden lotus), lined with campaka trees and golden campaka creepers. Its inner and outer portions were gold. Lalitā’s kuñja, located on the northern side of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, was Rādhā-Mādhava’s favorite forest because of its newer and newer astonishing delights. Viśākhā’s kuñja, named Madana-sukha-da was located in the northeast corner of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Four immense campaka trees embraced by mādhavī creepers adorned its four corners. The fragrance of their pink, green, yellow and dark blue flowers obliterated all other smells and spread pleasure everywhere. The madhavi vines, intertwined in the branches of the bent over campaka trees, created a palace-like effect. Yellow, blue and green bees, cuckoos and parrots enlivened the place with their sweet sounds. In all directions, the kuñja appeared multi-hued. It was replete with a variety of ornaments made from land and water flowers and buds. There were fine tapestries, canopies and soft flowerbeds made of pink, white, yellow and dark blue lotuses and water lilies. The four doors were decorated with smalls panels made of colorful flowers and buds tied to strong reeds. Swarms of intoxicated bees hovered around like doorkeepers. A sixteen petalled lotus molded from numerous types of glittering gems sat in the center. Four dazzling terraces sat under four towering campaka trees. The terraces were very pleasing to sit on because of the dense foliage overhead. Madana-sukha-da Kuñja, located northeast of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, was the abode of bliss for the eyes. The king of all kuñjas; it was the very form of rasa and prema. Mañjumukhī, an artist disciple of Viśākhā, maintained and continually cleaned the kuñja that always overflowed with Rādhā-Mādhava’s conjugal delights. Citrā-sakhī’s kuñja, named Citrānanda (bliss of Citrā), ornamented the eastern bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Everything in this kuñja was multicolored or made from multicolored gems including the bees, birds, vines, seats, platforms, cottages, pathways, swings and its central whorl. The beautiful white kuñja of Indulekha, called Pūrṇendu (full moon), ruled the southeast shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Amazingly, everything in this realm including the trees, leaves, seats, platforms, courtyards and cottages was white due to being made of crystal and moonstone. All the lotuses, water lilies and jasmine flowers were white. The trees and creepers had white flowers. No one could detect the white bees, cuckoos and parrots because they merged in the white scenery. They could be perceived only by hearing their sweet singing. On the full moon night, no one could see Rādhā-

/Q: Mādhava and the sakhīs sporting here in their white clothes. Pūrṇendu Kuñja, which contained brilliant white flowerbeds for Kṛṣṇa’s conjugal pastimes, always gave joy to Indulekhā. On the southern shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa stood Campākalatā’s Hema Kuñja, wherein everything was golden, including the earth, trees, creepers, flowers, bees, lotuses, courtyards, pavilions, swings, platforms and paraphernalia for pastimes. Whenever Rādhikā came here dressed in golden yellow garments, ornaments and cosmetics, the eager eyes of Śyāma could not detect Her. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa came here disguised in gold cloth. Merged in the golden background, Kṛṣṇa would eavesdrop on Rādhikā’s secret love talks with Her sakhīs. One time Padmā (a confidant of Candrāvalī) saw Rādhā-Mādhava enter this golden kuñja. Padmā became extremely jealous and immediately informed Rādhā’s mother-in-law Jaṭilā. The infuriated Jaṭilā rushed here to capture Rādhā red handed. However, much to her surprise, Jaṭilā only saw Kṛṣṇajī sitting alone, even though Gaurāṅgi Rādhā was sitting right beside Him! Hema Kuñja, which gave bliss to Campakalatā, turned everything within it to gold, just as all objects become gold in Kāñcana-bhūmi. Campakalatā’s kuñja also featured a famous kitchen and a splendid eating platform. Rādhā-Mādhava and the sakhīs regularly enjoyed sumptuous feasts here prepared by Vṛndā and Campākalatā. Raṅgadevī’s śyāma-colored Sukhaprada Kuñja lay to the southwest of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Rādhikā appreciated this kuñja because its dark blue color reminded Her of Her darling Śyāma. Everywhere bluish creepers embraced tamāla trees. The ground, temples and cottages were studded with blue sapphires. Whenever Mukharā (Rādhā’s grandmother) or some elderly gopīs passed by here they could not see Śyāmasundara sitting beside Rādhikā. Sukhaprada Kuñja or Śyāma Kuñja (second name), which gave pleasure to Raṅgadevī, was the best bower because it always served to incite Rādhā’s passionate love for Śyāma. On the western shore of Rādhā-kuṇḍa was the crimson kuñja of Tuṅgavidyā called Aruṇa Kuñja or Tuṅgavidyānanda-prada (gives bliss to Tuṅgavidyā). The entire kuñja was inlaid with rubies. By Kṛṣṇa’s desire all the birds, animals, trees, vines, flowers, paths and swings were made of red gems. Sudevī’s pleasure producing kuñja, named Harit Kuñja, adorned the northwest corner of Rādhā- kuṇḍa. All the birds, trees and flowers were green and all the walkways, platforms, pavilions and cottages were bedecked with emeralds. Everyday Rādhā-Mādhava played pāśa-khelā (dice board game) here. Harit Kuñja gave intense bliss to Sudevī. Ānangāmbuda Kuñja, belonging to Ānanga-mañjarī, Rādhikā’s younger sister, was located in the middle of Rādhā-kuṇḍa like an island. It was called Salila Kamala (water lotus) Kuñja because it was shaped like a sixteen-petaled lotus and it appeared to be floating on the water. It had a large lotus shaped temple made of moonstone, rubies and emeralds. Many statues of swans, lotuses, lilies and other objects carved from gems beautified the kuñja. A magnificent crystal bridge connected the kuñja with Lalitā’s kuñja in the north. Rādhā-kuṇḍa was as dear to Kṛṣṇa as Rādhā Herself. Mādhava, the full moon of Vraja, was conquered by the endless qualities of Rādhā-kuṇḍa as He continuously sported there with Rādhikā in deep love. Just by bathing once in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, one attains love for Kṛṣṇa like Rādhikā’s. Therefore, who can adequately describe the sweet glories of Rādhā-kuṇḍa? Rādhā-kuṇḍa filled the heart of Kṛṣṇa, the guru of all gallant men, with joy because its different

/Q: qualities reminded Him of Rādhikā. However, this increased Kṛṣṇa’s intense feelings of separation from Rādhā and made Him extremely eager to meet Her. Kṛṣṇa felt overwhelmed in separation from Rādhā. While gazing at the beautiful Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Kṛṣṇa saw His sweetheart in the various features of the kuṇḍa. The cakravāka birds flirting in the water were Rādhā’s breasts, the foam on the water was Rādhā’s pearl necklace, agitated by ripples of delight. The waves in Rādhā-kuṇḍa were just like the waves of Rādhikā’s sweet affection in madhura-rasa. The lotus flowers resembled Kiśorī’s lovely lotus face. The bees buzzing above the lotuses appeared like Rādhā’s elegant curly locks hanging over Her forehead. The darting humming birds (khañjana) resembled Rādhā’s restless blue eyes. The sweet chortling of the swans (haṁsa) echoed the pleasant jingling of Rādhā’s haṁsaka foot ornaments. Thus, Kṛṣṇa saw His beloved Rādhā in Her kuṇḍa. The shaking red lotuses of Rādhā-kuṇḍa blocked the incoming waves from Śyāma-kuṇḍa. Similarly, Rādhā’s trembling red lotus hands prevented Kṛṣṇa from embracing Her with His arms. Rādhā threw crooked glances at Kṛṣṇa when He forcibly kissed Her lotus face. Similarly, the bees angrily left the lotuses in Rādhā-kuṇḍa when the lotuses from Śyāma-kuṇḍa, moved by the wind, forcibly overtook the lotuses in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Rādhā, though internally pleased, showed the ornament of repulsion by feigned faltering screams whenever Kṛṣṇa attempted to touch Her breasts or lips. Similarly, the kuṇḍa seemed to show false anger with the humming of its agitated bees and the cawing of its birds. Kṛṣṇa thought the two kuṇḍas, filled with lotus flowers swaying in the wind, were like the eyes of Govardhana Hill who had assumed the form of a peacock to drench Him in tears of love. The unlimited qualities of Rādhā-kuṇḍa continually excited Kṛṣṇa’s mind and heart with remembrance of Rādhā’s wonderful form, attributes and sweet dealings. Though Kṛṣṇa’s mind immersed in ecstasy, He became extremely impatient over His imminent meeting with Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa pacified Himself by glancing at Śyāma-kuṇḍa, gleaming with the beautiful kuñjas created and maintained by His most confidential boyfriends (priya narma sakhās), such as Subala, Madhumaṅgala, Ujjvala, Arjuna, Gandharva, Vidagdha, Bhrṅga, Kokila, Dakṣa and Sannanda. The lovely kuñjas surrounding Śyāma-kuṇḍa, which were named after the various priya-narma sakhās, were affectionately entrusted by them to Rādhikā, Lalitā, Viśākhā and the other main sakhīs. On Śyāma-kuṇḍa’s northwest bank was Subala’s bower Subalānanda-da, which was overseen by Rādhā, who daily bathed there at Mānasa-pāvana ghāṭa with Her sakhīs. Because the water was mixed with the honey nectar of Śyāma’s lotus feet, Rādhikā bathed there with great eagerness. Rādhā loved Śyāma-kuṇḍa as much as She loved Kṛṣṇa. North of Śyāma-kuṇḍa was the colorful bower of Madhumaṅgala called Madhumaṅgala-śanda. It was very dear to Rādhikā and supervised by Lalitā. Viśākhā oversaw Ujjvala’s kuñja in the northeast called Ujjvalānanda-da. The kuñjas of Kṛṣṇa’s best friends, which had been given to Kṛṣṇa’s foremost sakhīs (Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citra, Campākalatā, Raṅgadevī etc.), were arrayed in all directions around Śyāma-kuṇḍa. On the east side of Śyāma-kuṇḍa and the west side of Rādhā-kuṇḍa were two public ghāṭas for humans and animals to bathe and drink. Only liberated souls and sādhakas, who have developed the proper bhāva, can see the true transcendental form of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in their hearts. Others only see externally and think it is a

/Q: material place. Vṛndā was very happy to see that Kṛṣṇa had come to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. She promptly approached Kṛṣṇa and gave Him two karṇikā flower buds to decorate His ears. Vṛndā took Kṛṣṇa on a tour through all the fascinating kuñjas, which she had personally arranged on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The sight of these kuñjas exhilarated Kṛṣṇa’s mind with memories of Kiśorī. When Kṛṣṇa entered Viśākhā’s stunning kuñja named Madana-sukha-da, He happily remembered all the blissful pastimes He had there with Rādhā, and He desired to have more. Kṛṣṇa was very satisfied seeing the bower so skillfully designed and decorated by Viśākhā and Her assistants Mañjumukhī and Vṛndā. Śyāma, overcome with deep longing for Rādhā’s love, said, “O Vṛndā! If I attain the good fortune of freely enjoying sweet pastimes here with Rādhikā, then these beautiful banks and your artistically decorated kuñjas, sweetened by the touch of spring, will fulfill their purpose. Perhaps Rādhā may become jealous and not come if She hears from Tulasī that I met Śaibyā this morning. Please send someone to inform Rādhā that I deceived Candrāvalī’s party and sent them far away. Now I am at Rādhā-kuṇḍa longing to meet Her!” Turning to Dhaniṣṭhā, Kṛṣṇa said, “Go to Lalitā and ask her to immediately bring Rādhā! Inspire Rādhā to come by informing Her of the condition of Mādhava (spring: Kṛṣṇa). Fill Rādhā with affection and thirst by telling Her, ‘Kṛṣṇa is being tortured by Cupid’s piercing arrows and suffering intensely without You. Please come immediately!’ “O Vṛndā! Send one clever sakhī on the cow path to deceive and divert any cowherd boy who may come this way looking for Me. Another shrewd sakhī should watch the path to Gaurī Tīrtha to mislead Śaibyā and the other members of Candrāvalī’s group.” Noticing Madhumaṅgala greedily eyeing a stalk of ripe bananas, Hari jokingly addressed Vṛndā, “This brāhmaṇa boy is lusty for bananas. However, one stalk of bananas will not fill Bātu’s belly, so you better give him two!” Madhumaṅgala quipped, “O friend! Why depend on Vṛndā? Just give me the word and I will eat to my full satisfaction.” Vṛndā immediately sent a pair of cunning sakhīs to guard the paths to Gaurī Tīrtha and the cowherd meadows. Kṛṣṇa, pining for Rādhā, fixed His eyes on the path to Yāvaṭ by which She would come to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa’s gravity rivals the depths of hundreds of oceans. In the absence of Rādhā’s sweetly smiling face, however, Kṛṣṇa lost all patience and felt each second to be a millennium. This should not appear astonishing, however, for it is the natural consequence of a lover’s intense attachment to his beloved.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 7.31-132

+A: (10:48 a.m.—3:36 p.m.) Madhyāhna-līlā - Midday pastimes
/Q: Gauraṅga remembered the midday pastimes of Rādhā-Govinda and Their associates. The Golden Lord then enacted those pastimes among His devotees. As Gaura tasted the bliss of vraja-prema, His hair stood on end and His voice choked in ecstasy. O my mind! Please engage in the eternal worship of Śacīnandana! Mūla-sūtra: Rādhā-Govinda experienced a flurry of ecstatic bodily transformations while delighting in the bliss of Their midday meeting. The Divine Couple sported throughout the forests with Lalitā and the other sakhīs. They shared Cupid’s delights amidst much laughter and joking; played on a swing; rambled through the woods; played water-sports in Rādhā-kuṇḍa; enjoyed flute stealing, shared divine union, drank honey-wine and worshiped the sun. Let us always remember Rādhā- Govinda’s midday pastimes as They are served by the Vraja-gopīs.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.1

= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (10:48 a.m.—11:12 a.m.)

-L: Rādhā’s attraction to Kṛṣṇa

/Q: Meanwhile, at home in Yāvaṭ, Rādhikā, the most beloved of Vraja’s prince, intensely yearned with every sense and limb to meet Mādhava. When Her companion Viśākhā tried to console Her, Rādhikā revealed Her mind: “O sakhī! The high waves from the nectar ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s beauty completely inundate the mountain of every woman’s patience. Kṛṣṇa’s joking words fill the ears with joy. His lustrous body is cooler than a million moons. Śyāma’s sweet lips defeat the taste of nectar and the ambrosial fragrance of His body floods the entire world. Nandanandana has forcibly attracted all My senses! “O sakhī! The luster of Śyāma’s gorgeous body is more brilliant than a rain cloud. His yellow cloth shines more attractively than lightning. Kṛṣṇa’s captivating flute enhances His splendor and His face is more radiant than the autumn full moon. A colorful peacock feather adorns His head and a necklace of brilliant pearls spreads across Śyāma’s broad chest like a row of stars. O sakhī! By such beauty, Madanmohan fully entices the thirst of My eyes. “Kṛṣṇa’s voice rivals a rumbling rain cloud and His jingling ornaments allure the ears. His joking words weave tapestries of rapturous hidden meanings. Śyāma’s sweet flute music steals the heart of Lakṣmī and all other virtuous women. Madanmohan completely captivates My ears. “The fragrance of Śyāma’s body conquers the aroma of musk and enslaves all women. The eight richly scented lotuses of Kṛṣṇa’s body (face, navel, two eyes, hands and feet) far surpass the fragrance of camphor and lotus combined. The finest aguru, musk, camphor and sandalwood adorn Kṛṣṇa’s limbs. Madanmohan always increases the desire of My nose. “Śyāma’s luscious chest is as broad and beautiful as a door made of blue sapphires. His two arms, as strong as bolts, relieve the mental anguish of young girls afflicted by lusty desires. Mādhava’s body is cooler than camphor, lotuses, moonbeams and yellow sandal paste. Madanmohan lures the fascination of My breasts. “For the incomparable housewives of Vraja, the nectar of Śyāma’s sweet lips vanquishes the desire

/Q: for all other tastes. One cannot get even a drop of the nectar unless he has accrued heaps of pious credits. The juicy remnants of Kṛṣṇa’s pān defeat the taste of celestial ambrosia. Madanmohan increases the madness of My tongue.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.2-8 Rādhikā’s eyes flooded with tears and Her divine body trembled. She also exhibited many other ecstatic symptoms while revealing Her intense desires to Viśākhā. Rādhā then gazed with great longing at the pathway on which Tulasī-mañjarī would return with news of Kṛṣṇa.

-L: Power of Kṛṣṇa’s flute

/Q: At that moment, Acyuta dispatched a female messenger (dūtī) in the form of His flute (muralikā) song to enter Rādhā’s ears and bring Her around His neck as a golden garland. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 8.34 The extraordinary sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, which mimics the song of a swan in a pond of madhura- rasa, the buzzing of bees in an abode of flowers of love, or the clashing of cymbals during the battle of Eros, attained victory by stinging the hearts of the gopīs. Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭakam 3.33 The seductive sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute entered the ears of the Vraja-gopīs and incited intense lust within their hearts. It cast an unbreakable spell upon the gopīs and sounded a deathblow to their self- control, proper conduct and family reputation. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 17.5 When Rādhā heard the bewitching poison-like sound, She both praised and condemned it to Her sakhīs: “O friends! What is this amazing flute music? It brings no cold or snow, but still it makes Me shiver. It is not a weapon, but still it cuts Me to the quick. It brings no heat, but still it sets Me on fire. Vidagdha-mādhava 1.35 “O cruel flute! Although you and the bow are both born from bamboo, it is to the bow that I offer My respectful obeisances and not to you. When the bow’s arrow pierces the body, one dies without prolonged pain. However, when your musical arrows, which are more terrible than Cupid’s darts, pierce our hearts, We experience a most horrible condition wherein We can neither live nor die. Vidagdha-mādhava 6.12 “Though the flute is full of holes (faults), it is faultlessly and continuously attracted to Kṛṣṇa’s lips. Though hard, it softens the hard hearts of all entities. Though it ever sings, it silences the birds and beasts. Though born from a good family (vaṁsa: bamboo, family), it corrupts the hearts of women from good families. “Though the flute is hollow and empty, it is full of melody. Though it has only one joint (parva), it manifests hundreds of festivals (parvani). Though it has a soothing tone (kala), it agitates (vikala) the whole world. The muralī’s sweet sound simultaneously stuns the whole universe and fills everyone with joy. “Though the sound is very slight, it spreads throughout the whole world. Though the sound enters the ear, it spreads pain throughout the whole body. Though the sound has sweetness as its nature, it produces many other tastes; sometimes nectar and sometimes poison. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.34-36 “I do not know whether the flute is spouting poison or nectar. Is it harder than a thunderbolt or softer than water? Is it hotter than blazing fire or cooler than the moon? However, I do know that hearing it drives all the Vrajavāsīs mad. Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.6.48 “Though the flute fully enjoys the stream of beauty from Kṛṣṇa’s splendid red lips and fingertips, the

/Q: stream of beauty does not stay within the flute, but flows out its holes. It seems the flute is giving up the beauty of the mālavaśrī rāga and revealing its pure passion (rāga). When Kṛṣṇa kisses the flute with His bud-like lips, His gentle smile reveals the rays of His brilliantly white teeth and the gopīs’ faces glow with bliss. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.32-33 “Glory to the sound of the flute, the abode of wonder! It causes rivers to freeze solid and hard mountains to melt into rivers of ecstasy. Dead trees spring to life with fresh green leaves and sages fixed in Brahman become restless and agitated. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.37 “O girls with beautiful faces! A person is considered fortunate even if she sees Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face from a distance. One is even more fortunate if she can kiss Kṛṣṇa with the corners of her eyes. However, one who tastes the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips, previously savored by His flute, has attained the topmost indescribable fortune. “O flute! You hold a special position because when Śyāma kisses You, You become overwhelmed by the touch of His teeth, glimmering like moonbeams. Your indistinct tones, which madden the world, indicate that You have reached the climax of bliss like the murmuring of a woman satisfied in love. “Kṛṣṇa’s brightly shining teeth look like a row of ripe pomegranate seeds sitting within a lotus, or a row of rubies embedded in the full moon. “The flute acts very boldly by tasting Kṛṣṇa’s lips, which are dear to His paramours and meant only for their enjoyment. I do not know what pious acts the flute has done, because without effort it possesses the precious jewel of Kṛṣṇa’s lips. “When the water that Kṛṣṇa drinks or uses to wash His face contacts the drops of nectar left by the flute after it has tasted His lips and falls to the ground, all the rivers turn solid and their hair stands on end in the form of lotuses bursting into bloom. The trees pull that nectar up through their roots and drop tears of honey from their flowers. “The glorious earth is supremely worshipable because Kṛṣṇa marks her with His splendid footprints like an independent lover drawing designs on the breasts of His sweetheart. The endless stream of nectar of Śyāma’s flute has electrified the heart of mother earth. Thus her hair in the form of the grass and shoots is always standing on end. “The greatness of Vṛndāvana cannot be understood by women like Me. Here, the peacocks, feeling happy in heart, dance gracefully upon hearing the thundering flute sound of the Śyāma rain cloud. Stunned by that sound, the gentle leaves of the creepers blowing in the wind become motionless! “O sakhī! I do not know what austerities the does have performed so that they can always hear Mādhava’s melodious flute and gaze upon His gorgeous face with their large innocent eyes. Now We can appreciate the extent of their fortune. The kṛṣṇa-sāra doe and her husband are most fortunate because with their ears they fearlessly drink the honey sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute flowing from His lotus face. “The wives of the devatās moving in their air ships with their husbands are very fortunate because they have developed deep attachment for Kṛṣṇa. They are always attracted to the captivating form of Kṛṣṇa, and they feel extremely impatient upon hearing His enchanting flute. Losing all composure, their hair braids loosen and the knots of their underwear slacken. In their agitated condition, they forget to drop pleasant flowers and shower Kṛṣṇa with tears of love instead. “When the nectar river of Kṛṣṇa’s flute song enters the ears of the cows, they cock their ears in

/Q: attentive longing, their eyes open wide, the grass remains half-chewed in their teeth and their bodies remain motionless like figures drawn in a painting. “While clutching their mother’s udders, the calves neither suck milk, let go, or swallow the milk already within their mouths. O sakhī! Enchanted by the mellifluous sound of the flute, the cows automatically drop their milk, but only the earth is drinking it! “O sakhī! All the birds have abandoned their skittish natures. They just listen attentively to Kṛṣṇa’s sweet flute while relishing the beauty of His transcendental form. The birds, meditating on the music with closed eyes, resemble sages steeped in bliss. “O friend! The birds are stunned in ecstatic jubilation. They do not fly, eat or sing. They simply relish the joyous sound of Śyāma’s flute and respond by fluffing out their feathers in bliss. “The Yamunā and other rivers, mesmerized by Mādhava’s muralī, are intensely agitated and spinning in whirlpools. The bubbles on the surface seem like foam forming on the mouth (a vyabhicāri bhāva called apasmāra) of the river. It seems they have been struck by Cupid’s arrows and affected with a form of epilepsy. The swans and cakravākas bobbing in the waves of the river look like the disarrayed clothing of the river. The sandy banks look like the unclothed hips of the river. “O sakhī! The rivers, trembling in happiness from hearing Kṛṣṇa’s flute, offer lotuses to Him with the hands of their waves! The rivers have adopted the mood of Kṛṣṇa’s lovers by refreshing Him with sprinkles of cool water. “O friend! Even the unconscious cloud, which shares Kṛṣṇa’s color, displays his affection by moving here and there to act as an umbrella shielding Kṛṣṇa from the scorching autumn sun. Whenever Kṛṣṇa becomes tired from herding the cows or playing His flute, the cloud, like an attentive friend, immediately removes His fatigue by releasing drops of water as cooling as atoms of camphor. “Just see the fortune of the Pulinda women (low class jungle dwellers)! They attain ecstatic fulfillment by smearing their faces and breasts with the kuṅkuma fallen on the grass from Śyāma’s feet that once adorned His lover’s breast. “To relish Śyāma’s sweetness is the object of everyone’s desire. There is no consideration of qualification. Though the Pulindas are mere aborigines, We cannot say that they do not deserve the fortune of being intensely attracted to Kṛṣṇa. Such signs of greed indicate the extent of one’s real attachment to Kṛṣṇa. “Govardhana Hill enhances Mādhava’s pastimes by continually supplying roots, water, fruits, colored mineral powders and caves for merrymaking. Thus, Govardhana is the best servitor of the Lord. O sakhī! Affectionate Kṛṣṇa fulfills the desires of all those who take shelter of Govardhana. This is the conclusion of the scriptures. Even the most unqualified can attain perfection in sādhana by such assistance.” Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.40-62 The naturally sweet sound of Śyāma’s flute became even more delicious by Rādhā’s description. The sakhīs drank that sweet nectar to their full satisfaction with the cups of their thirsty ears.
-L: Tulasī-mañjarī brings news of Kṛṣṇa
/Q: After Rādhikā revealed Her heartache to the sakhīs, Tulasī-mañjarī suddenly arrived carrying Kṛṣṇa’s guñja mālā and two campaka flowers, which she presented to Lalitā. She related the latest news about Kṛṣṇa. Lalitā joyfully put the guñja mālā around Kiśorī’s neck and hung the campaka

/Q: flowers over Her ears. The remnants had become wonderfully fragrant by Hari’s touch. Rādhikā experienced the profound happiness of directly touching Kṛṣṇa just by contacting His remnants. Rādhā’s lotus eyes blossomed, Her bodily hair stood erect and She trembled with intense eagerness to meet Śyāma. However, Rādhā could not move due to being momentarily stunned in euphoria. Three sakhīs named sobriety, obstinacy and fine judgment appeared to rouse Rādhā from Her daze. Gaining control of Herself, Kiśorī spoke some crooked joking words to Her sakhīs, who eagerly desired to take Her to Śyāma. Rādhā said, “O doe-eyed girls! Why wait for Me? If you are so anxious to depart, just go have a look. The Kṛṣṇa stag (kṛṣṇa-sāra) is trapped in the noose of Śaibyā’s words. The drunken Kṛṣṇa elephant (padmin) fell into Candravali’s snare. All of you padminīs (women) must certainly save the padmin (Kṛṣṇa elephant)! O sakhīs! Knowing that haste results in failure, the wise never act impulsively. They attain success by moving according to a plan.” Lalitā, appreciating Rādhā’s puns, replied, “O sakhī! You are absolutely right! Hari did not come to the appointed place, but He went to enjoy with Śaibyā and others instead. If we show our faces there, however, our prestige will be burned to ashes.” Lalitā’s words reminded pining Rādhā of the many obstacles in meeting Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā’s mind tossed in turmoil as She contemplated: “My sister-in-law envies Me, My husband speaks harshly and My treacherous mother-in-law distrusts Me. Padma and the anti-party are very strong. Furthermore, during the day, Kṛṣṇa is always in the forest surrounded by His cowherd boyfriends. How can I possibly surmount all these obstacles and meet My lover? I am so unfortunate! It is very doubtful I will meet Kṛṣṇa today.” Rādhikā, disturbed by these doubts, suddenly heard an auspicious omen from outside Her home. One astrologer met another person on the road and said, “The bull (the best person) is attainable by the mountain (Govardhana).” This riddle made Rādhikā’s left breast, hip, arm and eye twitch auspiciously, indicating Her imminent meeting with Kṛṣṇa. Initially Rādhā was elated over the favorable signs. But then Her love-drenched heart again became doubtful about meeting Śyāma. Dhaniṣṭhā arrived unexpectedly like a rushing river to quench Rādhā’s thirst to hear about Kṛṣṇa.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.9-21
-L: Dhaniṣṭhā describes the beauty of spring
/Q: Dhaniṣṭhā’s smile indicated that Kṛṣṇa had sent her. Rādhā’s excited heart swirled with ecstatic sentiments. However, Rādhā concealed Her emotions and used various clever pretexts to inquire about Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā: “O Dhaniṣṭhā! From where have you come?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “From Vṛndāvana.” Rādhā: “Did you experience the beauty of spring (Mādhava)?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “Yes, I saw it.” Rādhā: “Did you see Govardhana Hill, the best of mountains (gotra varya)? (inner meaning: Did you see the best of His dynasty (gotra varya), who always protects the cow (go tra)? Dhaniṣṭhā: “Yes, I saw it.” Rādhā: “Please describe the beauty you observed?”

/Q: Dhaniṣṭhā: “O sakhī! How can I fully describe the charm of spring? Swarms of chubby bumblebees were savoring the nectar of the blossoming tilaka (sesame) flowers. The cuckoos were cooing enchantingly to attack every young girl with lusty desires.” (inner meaning: How can I fully describe the charming sweetness of Kṛṣṇa? He inflames lust in the hearts of young girls with His blooming forest garland surrounded by honeybees, the attractive tilaka on His forehead and His playful sweet words). “O sakhī! Who can describe the glory of spring? Simply seeing the beautiful springtime forest is enough to agitate one with amorous desires.” (inner meaning: Who can describe the beauty of Śyāma? Simply by seeing Him, You have become afflicted with amorous desires.) “Govardhana shines with uniquely colored stones and mineral pigments. The rustling sounds of the bamboo growing there reassure the worried cows that streams of drinking water flow nearby. Its summit (śṛṅga) resounds with the pleasant chirping of birds. Govardhana nourishes and shelters all the cows.” (inner meaning: Giridhārī’s handsome limbs are decorated with colorful mineral pigments. His sweet flute playing removes the cows’ fear that angry Indra may return with His torrential rains. Kṛṣṇa is playing loudly on His buffalo horn, śṛṅga).” Dhaniṣṭhā’s sweet honey-wine puns about Kṛṣṇa completely intoxicated Rādhā and stimulated Her desire to hear more about Her Prāṇakānta. Rādhikā, casting aside all reservation, started talking frankly about Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā: “O sakhī! Where are You going now?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “I am coming to see You.” Rādhā: “For what purpose?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “To relay some news.” Rādhā: “News about whom?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “About the moon of Vraja (Kṛṣṇacandra).” Rādhā: “What is the news?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “Just as the moon is eclipsed by Rāhu, Kṛṣṇacandra’s arch enemy Kandarpa Rāja (Cupid) is overpowering Him. Kṛṣṇa is in a helpless position backed only by His shadow, whereas Kandarpa is accompanied by many heavily armed soldiers. Kandarpa, being jealous of Kṛṣṇa’s superior beauty, is striking Him with spring, his invincible general. “Kandarpa has covered Kṛṣṇa from above with his flower arrows and surrounded Him with his numerous soldiers of honeybees, cuckoos and the gentle southern breeze. Kṛṣṇa is trapped in the forest beside Your kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa, like a stranded general, begs You to come to His aid. With Your help, Kṛṣṇa can easily defeat Kandarpa’s bees, cuckoos and other allies. In the past, Kṛṣṇa saved You many times from danger, however, today He has fallen into difficulty. Your association alone can deliver Him from the calamity. O sakhī! Only when Kṛṣṇa is with You can He be called Madanmohana, the enchanter of Cupid and the entire creation. Without You, however, Kṛṣṇa easily falls prey to Madana’s (Cupid) torture. “Listen sakhī! Hari is nicely dressed and ornamented and lying upon a flowerbed in a kuñja beside Your lake. Out of great yearning, Kṛṣṇa has cast aside all other thoughts and vowed to only speak about You. O woman with a gorgeous face! Though Kṛṣṇa is the most powerful romantic hero, the

/Q: relentless attacks of that wicked Kardarpa Rāja have shattered His patience. Kṛṣṇa is restlessly waiting inside a kuñja filled with buzzing bees and cooing cuckoos. “O chaste one! Who can describe the beauty of Śyāma’s enchanting form? Kṛṣṇa’s pleasing complexion resembles a new rain cloud and His exquisite silk dhotī shimmers like gold. Govinda’s glittering makara earrings dangle seductively from His ears. His entire body is anointed with fragrant unguents made of saffron, musk, sandal, vermilion and other items. Hari’s wide-open eyes resemble fully blossomed lotus flowers. A golden yuthika flower garland adorns His neck and a crown of peacock feathers beautifies His head. “In the vast ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s youth, His beauty is the water, His charms are the high waves and His amorous desires are the whirlpools. Moreover, the hurricane winds of Kṛṣṇa’s flute song have thrown the gopīs in that ocean and submerged their eyes and hearts in the whirlpools as if they were blades of grass. Yet in spite of this, Kṛṣṇa just stares toward the path by which You will come to Rādhā- kunda. “O Śaśimukhi! (moonface) Make Your cleverness successful by offering it to the clever enemy of Baka. Make Your wealth of youthful beauty fruitful by offering it to Kṛṣṇa, who abounds with fresh youth. Kṛṣṇa’s erotic desires will succeed when they meet Yours and His fine dress will attain perfection by Your touch. “All Your charms are rendered useless if directed elsewhere. O beautiful Rādhārāṇī! Kṛṣṇa is madly in love with You. His heart is melting and He is fully surrendered to You. Kṛṣṇa has been pierced by Cupid’s arrows. He is so exhausted that He is on the verge of fainting. Please go quickly and save Him!” Rādhikā felt keenly inspired to meet Her beloved after hearing these ambrosial words. However, the force of ecstatic love seized Rādhā’s heart and paralysed Her senses; Rādhā could not move. Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.22-38 Rādhā thought that the sakhīs were taking too much time perfecting Her dressing. Therefore, She admonished them and started dressing Herself, out of fear of being late for Her tryst with Kṛṣṇa.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 8.37
-L: The love journey to Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Slender-waisted Rādhā, overwhelmed in love’s excitement, put Her belt around Her neck, Her necklaces on Her ankles, Her arm bands on Her feet and Her anklets on Her arms. On going to meet Her lover, all of Rādhā’s limbs revealed their individual powers by broadcasting the joy of love. Alaṅkāra-kaustubhaḥ 5.123 Kiśorī tied Her necklace around Her waist as a belt, hung Her belt of tinkling bells on Her neck and tied Her lalāṭikā (forehead ornament) on the end of Her hair braid. She adorned Her eyes with musk (meant for Her chin) and Her forehead with tilaka made of eyeliner (kajjala). Rādhā applied foot lac on Her body instead of unguents. Rādhikā, sweetness personified, donned a blue outer garment and quickly left Her home. In that dark blue cloth, Rādhā appeared like a golden moon embraced by a rain cloud. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 8.38-40 Suddenly Kundalatā arrived, eager to take Rādhikā for Sūrya-pūjā. Rādhā twirled a pastime lotus in Her right hand, and held Kundalatā’s left hand as they went to meet Śyāma. Tulasī and Dhaniṣtḥā went

/Q: before Kiśorī, Lalitā and Viśākhā walked beside Her and other friends came behind. Rūpa-mañjarī, Rādhā’s lovely maidservant, followed behind carrying items for serving Rādhā-Mādhava. Two other mañjarīs brought the ingredients for Sūrya-pūjā. Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.39-41 Upon leaving the precincts of Yāvaṭ, Rādhā and Her sakhīs raised their veils to reveal their joyful lotus faces and thus dispel the darkness of bashfulness. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 8.41 Rādhā observed many auspicious signs while leaving the village, such as a bull, a herd of deer, a blue jay, a brāhmaṇa, a mongoose, cows with calves and a chaste wife carrying a pot of yogurt. While passing a lake, Kiśorī noticed two khañjana birds and a swarm of bumblebees dancing over a blue lotus. Rādhā mistook the flower for Śyāma’s lotus face, the birds for His swiftly moving eyes and the bees for the elegant black hair curling over Kṛṣṇa’s forehead. Rādhā, Her mind absorbed in meditation on Her beloved, became stunned in ecstasy. Rādhā rejoiced over these auspicious signs, and then entered the forest with the gait of an intoxicated elephant. Rādhā’s confidential sakhīs observed Her enthusiasm and playfully taunted Her with crooked jokes. Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.42-44 Rādhā’s eyes moved in all directions like a lotus swaying in a gentle breeze. Rādhikā walked with gentle, slow steps as gracefully as an elephant [In Sanskrit poetry, an elephant is considered a most graceful creature]. The torture of rising amorous desires propelled Rādhā to the pastime-forest. Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka 1.42 Lotus-eyed Rādhā entered the forest like the personified goddess of spring, causing the trees and creepers to bloom with flowers. Rādhā’s sweet voice resembled the soft, indistinct murmuring of the cuckoos. Her jingling ornaments resounded like buzzing bees or the chatter of caṭaka birds. Everything in the forest reminded Rādhā of Śyāma. Rādhā saw the brilliance of the syāma-latā as the splendor of Kṛṣṇa’s dark creeper-like body. She took the beautiful tilaka (sesame) flower to be Kṛṣṇa’s tilaka. The big arjuna trees reminded Her of Kṛṣṇa’s friends Arjuna, Viśāla and the blissful Balarāma. The peacocks strutting about were the peacock feathers adorning Kṛṣṇa’s head. The flowers blossoming on the punnāga, āmalakī and campaka trees were flowers in Kṛṣṇa’s garland. The golden kāñcana and vidruma trees with fresh red leaf buds were Kṛṣṇa’s attractive gold and coral jewelry. The bluish-black luster of the tamāla trees was Kṛṣṇa’s complexion. The abundant guñja berries in the forest were Kṛṣṇa’s glistening guñja mālā. The shade beneath the many kadamba trees was a cooling shelter for Her tired lover. Rādhā heard the rustling sound of the bamboos moving in the breeze as the attractive music of Mādhava’s sweet flute. The forest was replete with red amra fruits as Kṛṣṇa’s body was smeared with red vermilion ointment. The forest was full of blooming madana trees, which Rādhā took to be the intense amorous desires of Kṛṣṇa. Seeing the colorful birds fluttering in the forest reminded Rādhā of Kṛṣṇa’s youthful playful pastimes. Whatever Rādhārāṇī saw in the forest, She recognized as a feature of Kṛṣṇa’s body. The continual sight of Her sweetheart in this way pierced Rādhā’s heart with Cupid’s arrows. Yet amazingly enough, Rādhā still felt happy! Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.45-48 The sakhīs, marveling at Rādhā’s disturbed state on noting the similarity of the forest to Kṛṣṇa, commented, “O sakhī Rādhā! See the extraordinary beauty of the forest, full of blossoming aśoka, campaka trees and mādhavī creepers. The young bakula trees are budding, the attractive punnāga is bursting with flower clusters and birds sing in all the trees. The beautiful flower cottage perfumes the four directions with wind from the sandalwood trees.”
/R: Caitanya-candrodaya 1.35

/Q: Rādhā saw Śyāma’s footprints in the forest earth and remarked, “O Viśākhā! The forest is brilliantly ornamented with Kṛṣṇa’s footprints, marked with a flag, goad, lotus and thunderbolt. Just see how the flower buds become excited when touched by My fingernails. O sakhī! My heart is flowing with streams of ecstatic delight upon beholding the beauty of the forest.” Dāna-keli-kaumudī 13 While admiring the pristine beauty of the forest, Rādhā pondered, “Why the highly qualified gopī group leaders cannot find Kṛṣṇa, despite diligently searching for Him in the caves and secluded forests? Moreover, why did that greedy, lusty rake willfully abandon Us? “ While harboring doubt in Her heart, Rādhārāṇī saw a black buck (kṛṣṇasāra) sporting among a herd of deer on Her right and a peacock playing with many peahens on Her left. Their antics vividly awakened Rādhā’s memory of Kṛṣṇa’s propensity to sport with other sakhīs. When Rādhikā saw a dark tamāla tree, entwined by a golden yuthi creeper, giving shelter to a peacock with a fanned tail in its upper branches, She thought, “This must be Kṛṣṇa!” Then She became doubtful. By love’s bewilderment, Rādhā imagined that Kṛṣṇa was embracing another beautiful lover. The snake of jealousy immediately bit Rādhā. She furiously arched Her eyebrows like Siva’s bow and said to Dhanīsṭhā, “What’s this?” Dhaniṣṭhā replied, “What? Where?” Rādhā: “Just look in front of you!” Dhaniṣṭhā: “All I see is forest!” Rādhā: “What else do you see?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “Nothing but trees and creatures.” Rādhā: “Oh cunning one, are you blind? Can’t you see that shining moon of all cheaters dancing right before you?” Turning to Lalitā and the other sakhīs, Rādhā exclaimed, “O sakhīs! Just see that deceitful debauchee’s astonishing pleasure giving dance with His dearest heroine. The impudent dancer’s sweet words have deluded Dhaniṣṭhā and made her a deceiving dancer like Him. Now Dhaniṣṭhā is proudly supporting her master and trying to mislead us too by bringing us here! “Look there! Kṛṣṇa’s pet buck named Suraṅga cheats his mate Rangiṇī to enjoy other does. He does not stop, even though I have caught him. The buck learned all these deceitful ways from Hari, therefore, he is not Suraṅga but kuraṅga (a foul player). “See! Kṛṣṇa’s pet peacock Tāṇḍavika has rejected the association of his mate Sundarī, who is My pet. Now he shamelessly sports with other peahens right in front of Us. Kṛṣṇa’s association has also corrupted him!” Dhaniṣṭhā smiled and said, “O virtuous lady! You are the actual dancer calling us to witness Your unique performance. We are all pleased to see Your skill in this astonishing dance!” Dhaniṣṭhā addressed her companions, “O sakhīs! Let us go tell Kṛṣṇa all about Rādhā’s wonderful dancing. Surely, Kṛṣṇa will immediately come to join Rādhikā’s astonishing dance party; for talented people always appreciate other’s talents. Dhaniṣṭhā continued, “O Rādhā! Whether one’s desired object is easy to achieve or not, still the attached person always worries about the obstacles in attaining it!” After hearing Dhaniṣṭhā’s jokes and the sakhīs’ laughter, Rādhikā looked again more closely and

/Q: realized, “Uh, oh! This is not Kṛṣṇa dancing with a beautiful young lover. It is a tamāla tree embraced by a golden creeper.” Rādhā lowered Her head in embarrassment. Rādhikā intensely desired to drink the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s seductive sweetness after experiencing the joy of spring in Vṛndāvana. The sakhīs could easily understand that Rādhā’s mind was disturbed by various illusory visions due to the madness of love and Her eagerness to meet Mādhava. Therefore, they walked faster while continuing to joke with Rādhikā. Rādhārāṇī arrived with unexpected suddenness at the temple of the sun god in a kuñja within Her beloved flower garden named Madana-raṇa-vāṭikā (the garden of erotic encounters). Slender Rādhikā offered respects to the sun-god and devoutly prayed with folded hands: “Today, by your mercy, may I attain the lotus feet of Govinda without any obstacles!” Rādhā, detecting a contented look in Surya- deva’s eyes and face, inferred that the deity was pleased. Rādhā offered respects again and left the grove with Her friends. Lalitā asked Dhaniṣṭhā, Tulasī-mañjarī and a few of Vṛṇdā’s vanadevīs to stay there with the pūjā paraphernalia for worshiping the sun. The forest suddenly filled with Murāri’s enticing bodily fragrance, which rivals the scent of a blue lotus mixed with musk. When the exotic fragrance entered Rādhā’s flared nostrils, She became frantic and wanted to fly at once like an intoxicated bee to see Kṛṣṇa. Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.52-71 Rādhā smelled that wonderful fragrance and said joyfully, “O sakhī! Whose lovely fragrance has come through the dense forest to touch the creeper of My body and make its buds stand on end? I know! Mādhava is definitely in the forest. Because He alone is famous for having such a magnificent fragrance.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.68 Rādhā continued, “O brother wind! You must have performed austerities at some great pilgrimage place. As a result, You are now happily touching the feet of Gokulacandra continually with Your entire body.”
-L: Kṛṣṇa sends Vṛṇdā to bring Rādhā
/Q: Rādhikā’s beautiful bodily fragrance, which derides the scent of a lotus smeared with saffron, suddenly inundated the nearby forest like the ambrosial waves of the Ganga. Kṛṣṇa shivered in ecstasy when He smelled it. Then He wanted to race to Rādhā like an intoxicated honeybee. Rādhā’s bodily fragrance pleased Śyāma immensely. However, Kṛṣṇa thought that Rādhā was still far away, so out of great eagerness to meet Her, He immediately sent Vṛndā-devī to bring Her. Govinda- līlāmṛta 8.72-73 While running along the path, Vṛndā considered, “Why have foolish persons tried to compare the beauty of Kiśorī’s face with the moon or the lotus? Even from a distance, the beauty of Rādhikā’s face shames a score of nectar-giving moons and makes clusters of proud lotuses wither in defeat!” Dāna- keli-kaumudī 12 Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa went to Navāgrāma, a beautiful bower near Rādhā-kunda. When Rādhārāṇī saw Vṛndā approaching She considered her to be the personified fulfillment of all Her desires. Rādhā thought, “Kṛṣṇa is agitated with great longing to meet Me, so He has sent Vṛndā to inquire about My arrival.” Vṛndā gave Rādhā two blue lotus flowers, which previously hung on Kṛṣṇa’s ears. Blinded by the

/Q: distinct fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s divine body lingering on those flowers, a swarm of bees circled overhead. Rādhā experienced Kṛṣṇa’s touch and fragrance from contacting the blue lotuses and became mad with ecstatic love. Rādhā, while trying to suppress the various sāttvika bhāvas surfacing from Her heart, spoke to Vṛndā: “O sakhī, where have You come from?” Vṛndā: “I have come from Kṛṣṇa’s feet.” Rādhā: “Where is He?” Vṛndā: “He is in a grove near Your lake.” Rādhā: “What is He doing there?” Vṛndā: “He is learning to dance.” Rādhā: “Who is His teacher?” Vṛndā: “Your form, appearing in every trembling leaf, is the master dance instructor making Kṛṣṇa madly dance from one tree to the next as if He were dancing with You.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.74-77 Rādhā: “You are a liar! Do not speak like that!” Vṛndā: “O Rādhā, I am telling the truth! Listen! There are hundreds of radiantly beautiful young women in Gokula whose minds are totally attached to Kṛṣṇa. You alone, however, are the crest-jewel of them all. I can testify from personal observation that in separation from You, Kṛṣṇa does not even glance at another woman.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.27 Hiding her intentions, Rādhā responded, “O Vṛndā, what is the use of gossiping? We will bathe in the Pātāla Gaṅgā water of Śyāma-kuṇḍa, perform Surya-pūjā according to Jaṭilā’s order and go home.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.80 Again Rādhā asked Vṛndā, “Where are You going?” Vṛndā said: “I am approaching Your lotus feet.” Rādhā: “What for?” Vṛndā: “To tell You the good news from Your kingdom of Vṛndāvana.” Rādhā: “What is it?” Vṛndā: “Vṛndāvana is stimulated by the presence of Mādhava (spring or Kṛṣṇa), who hankers for the mercy of Your sidelong glance.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.81
-L: Rādhā, Vṛndā and Kundalatā’s discussion
/Q: Talkative Kundalatā boldly said, “O Vṛndā! Stop your sly canvassing. Fearing Kṛṣṇa’s atrocities, Jaṭilā has entrused Rādhā to Me. Therefore, I will take Her to bathe in the Pātāla Gaṅgā water of Śyāma-kuṇḍa and secretly escort Her to the sun temple. If Kṛṣṇa comes to Śyāma-kuṇḍa, we will bathe in Mānasi Gaṅgā instead. I promised Jātīlā that Rādhā and I will not even walk in the same direction pervaded by Kṛṣṇa’s bodily aroma.” Vṛndā exclaimed, “O Kundalatā! Why go to Mānasi Gāṅgā out of fear of Kṛṣṇa? If You want to bathe unseen in Śyāma-kuṇḍa, just take my advice. Right now, lovesick Kṛṣṇa is resting in a bower on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He will not notice if You take the eastern path through the mādhavī forest. You can bathe undisturbed in Śyāma-kuṇḍa, which is filled with the pure water flowing from Ariṣṭahantā’s

/Q: (Kṛṣṇa) lotus feet.” Lalitā said, “Kundalatā! Though you are an outspoken young woman, why do you fear your timid cousin-in-law Kṛṣṇa? Now you are acting like a foolish woman.” Rādhā said, “O sakhī Kundalatā! We will admire the beautiful springtime (mādhava) forest; take bath in My kuṇḍa and return. What can Kṛṣṇa do to us?” Lalitā continued, “Vṛndā, go quickly and chase Kṛṣṇa away from our bathing area! Men should not loiter at the ladies’ bathing ghāṭa. What would a cowherder like Him do there anyway?” Vṛndā replied, “Rādhā! I am very meek and tender and Kṛṣṇa is a strong brute. How can I drive Him away? Sakhī! You are a robust, bold young woman. Surely, You can drive away out that peacock- feathered fellow!” Kundalatā commented, “Vṛndā, You are making a mistake. Why would Caṇḍī (bold Rādhā or Durgā) drive away Paśupati (Kṛṣṇa, the cowherder or Śiva)? Afterall, isn’t Caṇḍī, Paśupati’s better half?” Vṛndā replied with a pun, “O sakhīs! Just see how the honeybee (Madhusūdana) enjoyed the beautifully shaped jasmine creeper (Kundalatā). However, now she is enthusiastic to wrap herself around the punnāga tree (the topmost man)!” All the sakhīs, except Rādhārāṇī, laughed at the funny puns. Vṛndā noticed that Rādhā was trembling out of deep love and anxiety to meet Śyāma. In order to relieve Rādhā, Vṛndā continued speaking: “O Lalitā! Please quickly answer one question? When the lord of the cātaka birds (Kṛṣṇa) pines with thirst upon seeing cloud banks (Rādhā) on the horizon, what should the winds (sakhīs) do?” Lalitā replied, “Vṛndā! When the ferocious rain clouds are sent by the winds during the day or night, they appear before the lord of the cātakas to fill His mouth with fresh nectar. Therefore, the cloud is the only shelter for the cātaka!” Lalitā continued, “O sakhīs! Since the cātaka’s attention is fixed solely on the rain cloud, surely the winds will unite them. Even if the cloud becomes depleted, the wind’s constant effect replenishes it with rasa.” Vṛndā said, “Therefore sakhīs, feel free to go bathe in Śyāma-kuṇḍa at Mānasa Pāvana Ghāṭa and worship Mitra (sun-god or Kṛṣṇa). I have some seva to perform, so I will stay here.” After the sakhīs left, Vṛndā cleverly sent the intelligent female parrot Sūkṣmadhī to spy on Jaṭilā’s activities in Yāvaṭ. She dispatched the female parrot named Śubhā to survey Candrāvalī movements at Gaurī-tīrtha. Vṛndā went to a jeweled cottage to inspect the service paraphernalia for the Divine Couples’ upcoming pastimes. Vṛndā loudly praised all the vana-devīs there for expertly arranging the dresses, decorations, flowers and refreshments needed for the next ten pastimes: swinging, forest rambling, water-sports, flute stealing, honey-wine drinking, divine union, forest picnic, parrot’s recitation, dice match and sun-god worship. Vṛndā delighted and encouraged all the trees and forest creatures by informing them of Rādhā- Govinda’s imminent arrival. Vṛndā, Nandīmukhī and others ran away and hid in a grove nearby Kṛṣṇa. They were intensely eager to bathe in the ocean of ambrosial rasa churned by the rising full moon of Rādhā-Govinda’s meeting.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.82-105
-L: Rādhā-Govinda’s mutual vision

/Q: Kṛṣṇa saw Rādhā and Her sakhīs walking down the path lined with bakula trees. He could not believe His eyes, however, because amorous excitement had bewildered Him many times before. Rādhikā became astonished and overwhelmed with intense ecstatic love upon seeing Kṛṣṇa. She too, however, did not believe Her eyes, because She previously mistook a tamāla tree for Kṛṣṇa. At that time, Rādhā’s girlfriends laughed about Her incoherent babbling and embarrassed Her. Rādhā- Govinda became completely inundated with divine bliss upon experiencing each other’s countless, naturally perfect qualities. They guessed about each other’s identity within Their minds. Kṛṣṇa wondered, “Has beauty personified assumed the form of a goddess, or perhaps She is the abode of fresh youth? Is She a flood of feminine grace and charm? Is She an ocean of personified sweetness, a river of pleasure or a fountain of nectar? Or is She My beloved coming to satiate all My senses with bliss?” Govinda-līlāmṛta 8.106-109 Kṛṣṇa addressed Subala, “O friend, isn’t this amazing? Has the expert sculptor Cupid carved Her charming body? Has She been painted by an artist named prema? Has the architect of beauty fashioned Her on a lathe? Has this sweet goddess been churned from the ocean of beauty? Though I see Her every day, She enchants Me as if I had never seen Her before! Caitanya-candrodaya 3.64 “O Subala! Is this woman the abode of amorous arts, who steals My heart by showing Me Her delicate limbs? Her beautiful body seems to be a painted masterpiece, or newly carved, or turned on the lathe of fresh youth, sharpened on the grinding stone of Cupid’s arts. Her limbs appear indolent from being dipped and raised in a deep pool of beauty. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 2.17 “Rādhā’s splendid face is the full moon for the thirsty cakoras of My eyes. She is the lotus for the honeybee of My nose and Her delicious lips are freshly blossomed mango buds for the cuckoo of My tongue. Kiśorī’s jingling ornaments attract the deer of My ears. She approaches Me like a cooling river of ambrosia for the mad elephant of My body burning in the fire of lust. Ah! The desire tree of My good fortune has now born fruit! Govinda-līlāmṛta 8. 10 “The corners of Rādhā’s eyes, marked with attractive kajjala, shine like khañjana birds in a golden cage. Her sweet smile glistens like powdered camphor. Caitanya-candrodaya 3.51 “O my friend Subala! When lotus-eyed Rādhārāṇī breathes, Her ruby-colored nostrils flare and the pearl under Her nose rocks to and fro as if riding on a swing moving in the breeze. This captivating vision of Rādhā has penetrated deep into My heart.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.76 Meanwhile, Rādhā mused, “Ah! Is this a dark tamāla tree, a fresh rain cloud or a dazzling sapphire pillar? Could it be a mountain of kajjala, a cluster of blue lotus flowers, a swarm of intoxicated bees, or a stream of the Yamunā? Or is it the beautiful blue lotus eyes of all the Vraja-gopīs combined? Is it the handsome demigod Cupid? No, because Cupid does not have a body. “Could it be the king of śṛṅgāra-rasa (erotic love)? No, because that king is not righteous. Perhaps it is an ocean of nectar? No, it is much broader than an ocean. Maybe it is a blooming desire tree of divine love? No, a desire-tree cannot move! Is this My Prāṇa Priyatama Śyāma? O, how could I be so fortunate?” Rādhikā said to Viśākhā, “Sakhī! I am bewildered! Is it My lover or a lotus for My thirsty honeybee eyes? Please tell Me the truth and do not tease Me.” Rādhā’s bodily hair stood erect in ecstasy, Her voice choked up and Her eyes darted restlessly because of the sakhīs’ joking. Viśākhā replied, “O Sumukhī! The person standing before You is the matchless musk tilaka adorning

/Q: Your forehead; the marvelous musk designs and pictures painted on Your breasts; the elegant musk dot anointing Your chin; the kajjala around Your eyes, the blue lotus ornament decorating Your ears; the blue lotus garland around Your neck and the auspicious ray of Your good fortune! Your lover is standing before You. Now, quickly go meet Him!” Govinda-līlāmṛta 8. 1- 14 As Rādhā beheld Her beloved, Her thirsty eyes expanded with bliss and tried to reach back to Her ears. Rādhikā’s inner jubilation poured out of Her eyes as tears of joy, like drops of perspiration from the exertion of Her eyes. Gīta-govinda 1.32 Tulasī looked at Kiśorī’s eyes and said, “May the victorious glance of Rādhā, which conquers the beauty of the lotus, ever reign supreme! The power of Rādhā’s glance is beyond description. Murāri, the conqueror of the three worlds, whom Lakṣmī chose as her husband by awarding Him her garland, has been completely devastated by that playful glance.” Lalita-mādhava 4.12 Tulasī’s words brought a frown to Rādhā’s face. A sakhī then said, “O Gaurī! The pupils of Your eyes have the power to bewilder all intelligent persons. O Gāndharvikā! The bees of Your eyes fly towards the fragrant lotuses dangling on Kṛṣṇa’s ears. Madhusūdana (the bee) totally forgets Himself just by the playful dancing of Your lotus eyes. How can Kṛṣṇa possibly remember any other lotus (Padmā, the friend Candrāvalī)?” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 7.51 Lalitā said, “Please greet that supremely joyful person standing before You, whose right leg is crossed over His left, whose body is attractively bent in three places, whose sidelong glances flit about, whose restless fingers dance on the flute caressing His pursed lips and whose dark eyebrows dance seductively. Lalita-mādhava 4.28 “Śyāma’s body glistens like a new rain cloud. His extraordinary splendor stuns millions of Cupids and His lustrous face defeats the beauty and charm of the autumn full moon. Mādhava’s eyes are elongated, moist and pink like fresh lotuses. His teeth shine like a row of flawless pearls between His red lips. Caitanya-candrodaya 3.39 “Hari, who has a rich blue complexion, all-pervading effulgence, a straight cowherding stick in His hand, a yellow cloth wrapped around His waist, a sweet bodily fragrance which shames the blue lotus, and a luscious form that is the epitome of prema is now amusing Himself in the forest. Lalita- mādhava 1.27 “O gorgeous woman! Look over there at that intoxicated bee among the clump of lotuses. What an astounding spectacle! His back is colored yellow from flower pollen collected while moving here and there. Now he is enthusiastically trying to obstruct the female bees while shaking his head and making bold sounds. Dāna-keli-kaumudī 19 “Behold the luster of the youthful Kṛṣṇa who is nectar for the eyes! His hands are the sikṣā-guru teaching graceful gestures to the autumnal lotus. His hands and feet surpass the tenderness of the fresh red shoots of the desire tree. The beauty of His eyes destroys the pride of all comparable things! Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 1.86 “How astonishing! Śyāma’s beautiful complexion colors the whole world dark blue. The splendor of His face transforms everything into moonlight. Kṛṣṇa’s sweet words convert all ears into containers of nectar. His gentle glance turns the sky into a lotus. How wonderfully attractive is the form of Kṛṣṇa!” Caitanya-candrodaya 3.50 Lalita’s words somewhat pacified Rādhikā. Rādhā gazed at Her beloved Śyāma and then expressed

/Q: Her desires: “All glories to Kṛṣṇa, My very life and the enchanter of the three worlds! His budding youth is adorned with the last flickering of childhood. His eyes are flashing with love’s delight. He bewilders Cupid with the nectar of His playful smile. His beauty beguiles at every moment. Out of deep love, He drinks from the mouth of His flute. Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta 1.88 “Śyāma’s charming lotus hands clutch a new flute. His guñja garland defeats the luster of rubies. The peacock feather on His head sways in the breeze. The charming beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s body thrills My heart.” Lalita-mādhava 4.18 Vṛndā said, “The crest-jewel of all nectar relishers, whose magnificent chest has taken a vow to make every virtuous gopī fall passionately in love with Him, and whose swinging arms have the power to fulfill the desires of every doe-eyed girl in all the worlds is now splendidly manifest before us.” Rādhā exclaimed, “Sakhī! Many times Kṛṣṇa walked on the pathway of My eyes, however, never before have I seen such wonderful sweetness in Him. My eyes have no power to capture even a single drop of the splendid handsomeness that shines from even one of His limbs.” Vṛndā said, “O Rādhā! Whenever You see Mādhava, You say He is a wonder You have never seen before. Is Kṛṣṇa really a new person every time You see Him? Or do Your eyes, astonished by love’s enchantment, forget that You have seen Him before?” Dāna-keli-kaumudī 27-29 Rādhā-Mādhava became overwhelmed with ecstatic love by seeing each other. Their divine bodies, minds and hearts trembled with intense jubilation. They stood still for a moment, stunned and unable to speak or act.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 8. 15
-L: Kṛṣṇa’s joy on meeting Rādhā
/Q: Rādhā-Govinda remained stunned for a few moments due to rapturous emotions. Their aching hearts then melted with the desire to meet and talk together. Rādhārāṇī stopped walking and assumed an attitude of opposition when She saw Kṛṣṇa just in front of Her. Rādhā partially covered Her lowered face with Her blue veil to conceal Her eyes which were dancing excitedly. Rādhā’s graceful gestures, constituting the emotional ornament named vilāsa, greatly enhanced Her beauty and the pleasure of Her lover. Rādhā’s senses were completely attracted to Kṛṣṇa and Her heart longed to be with Him. A sakhī named eagerness (autsukya) pushed Rādhā forward, but then a sakhī named shyness (lajjā) pulled Rādhā back. The sakhī named resistance (vāmata) pulled Rādhā to the left toward Her home, while the sakhī named concealment (avahitthā) forcibly pulled Rādhā to the right in order to pick flowers. Hari greatly relished the simultaneous appearance of these contrary emotions arising from Rādhā’s disturbed heart. As the four sakhīs of conflicting moods forcibly pulled Rādhā in different directions, She could neither move nor stand still. Rādhā’s timidity and an apparent desire to avoid Kṛṣṇa caused Her neck, waist and knees to bend with an attractive curve. The playful, flickering movement of Her vine-like eyebrows conquered the pride of Cupid’s bow. Seeing Kṛṣṇa happily relishing Her emotional ornament (known as lalitā), Rādhā grasped Lalitā’s hand for support as Her mind reeled in bliss. When the male dancer of Hari’s mind became pleased with the transcendental qualities of the female dancer of Rādhā’s beautiful body and came forward to embrace Her, Kṛṣṇa’s body followed and also came to embrace Rādhā.

/Q: Hari said, “O Priye! Your garments and ornaments are all misplaced due to Your rushing to meet Me. My mind and hands feel very restless by seeing Your beautiful form. Come, I will dress You properly.” After joking, Kṛṣṇa approached Rādhā with great eagerness to touch Her divine body. Rādhā shrank from His advances, hung Her head in hesitation and moved Her eyes restlessly. Rādhā thus delighted Her lover by decorating Her form with the emotional ornament called vibhrama. Kiśorī was being pulled strongly by shyness, contrariness and concealment as She walked away to pick flowers. Hari, however, impelled by desire, blocked Her path. Rādhā’s heart immersed in joy, but externally She displayed anger. Rādhā’s eyes reddened, filled with tears, darted about and bloomed with expectation. Her lips quivered from the force of lusty desires. She frowned and simultaneously betrayed a mild smile. Mādhava felt a million times happier beholding Rādhā’s face exhibit such emotion (kila-kiñcita- bhāva), than when He directly enjoys Rādhā. Indeed, this is an indescribable mystery! Rādhā strolled up to a punnāga tree. On the pretext of picking some flower buds, Rādhikā hastily stretched Her creeper-like arm above Her head toward its branches. Govinda-līlāmṛta 9. 1-19 While Rādhā was engaged in picking flowers within the sight of Kṛṣṇa, She was suddenly bitten by a bee. Rādhā trembled in fear and felt slightly faint. She held the shoulders of a friend for support. Although it was not caught in a creeper, Rādhā anxiously turned Her head to look at Her cloth. Madhyāhna-līlā (11:12 a. m.—11:36 a. m.)
-L: Conversations while flower picking
/Q: Rādhā’s lotus hands trembled uncontrollably as She, driven by the force of Her passionate love, hurried toward the forest filled with flowering trees. Stavamālā, svayam utprekṣita-līlā 6 One sakhī held the veil on Rādhā’s head and another fanned Her with new leaves. Rādhārāṇī slowly picked flowers with a one-pointed mind while glancing in the distance at Her lover. Alaṅkāra- kaustubha 5. 12 Viśākhā laughingly said, “Hey Rādhā! Do not pluck the flowers from the creeper because it has bloomed during the waning phase (kṛṣṇa-pakṣa) of the moon.” (inner meaning: It has taken shelter of Kṛṣṇa. Her hands in the form of branches are pulling Your dress to indicate that You should pluck the flower of Kṛṣṇa’s heart.) Rādhā replied, “The creeper bears special white flowers during the waxing phase of the moon (śukla-pakṣa). Why do you say that it blossoms during the waning phase (kṛṣṇa-pakṣa)? As the creeper cannot bear the pain of My separation from Kṛṣṇa, it is simply distracting Me for amusement. (inner meaning: The creeper, being favorable to Kṛṣṇa, is laughing at Me by showing white flowers. How can you say that she understands My pain of separation and is trying to divert My mind?)” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.42-43 Viśākhā: “O fool! You must be careful because a black bee is approaching with the intention of drinking the nectar of Your attractive face, mistaking it for a lotus. Beware, because black things do not have good character.” Rādhā: “Oh, when women like you show your lotus faces, why would that bee want to taste My scentless face?”

/Q: Viśākhā: “Oh beautiful eyed one! It is the custom on earth that one should not touch a woman during her period (puṣpavatī: a flowering plant). Therefore, O friend, do not touch the flowering creeper. During the month of Madhu (Caitra, March-April), the jasmine creeper is covered with tender leaves, devoid of flowers and therefore pure and suitable to touch.” (inner meaning: O Rādhā! Just as the jasmine is the best among all creepers, You are the best of the gopīs and famous as the most pure lady in Vraja. Especially during the month of Caitra, You have assumed attractive ornaments of love, suitable for being touched by Madhusūdana.) Rādhā: “All the creepers in the forest are pure, even though flowering (puṣpavatī). The wind purifies the entire universe and destroys all suffering just by touching them.” (inner meaning: Even though all the Vraja-gopīs are flowering, they are still completely pure. By touching them, the crest jewel of fickleness purifies the whole universe and destroys all suffering.) Viṣākhā: “O sakhī! Look at the attractive flowering aśoka tree. Quickly go serve it. All the Vrajavāsīs are going there to collect heaps of excellent red flowers.” (inner meaning: See the generous male decorated with flowers. Go serve Him! Those who approach Kṛṣṇa attain intense attachment for Him.) Rādhā: “O sakhī! Please understand that I will not touch even the name of a man bearing a body filled with lust. Keep that aśoka tree far from Me. O intelligent one, you can go there.” (inner meaning: I do not want to hear even the name of that gallant. Keep that cheater far away. If you are so clever, then you go mingle with Him.) Viśākhā: “O sakhī! Just see there, how attractive the punnāga tree stands with its beautiful, delicate flowers. It exudes an extraordinary fragrance and manifests a host of qualities to bewitch Your eyes.” (inner meaning: See how beautifully Kṛṣṇa stands in His attractive form, dispersing a sweet fragrance and manifesting a host of qualities to fascinate Your mind and eyes.) Rādhā: “What you previously mentioned about other trees is also a fault in this tree. Stretch out your arms to pick its flowers and you will be satisfied. You should choose that tree with the attractive blossoms.” (inner meaning: You should worship Kṛṣṇa and you will be satisfied. You can attain Him because of your elevated position. Surely, you are desirous of attaining that one who dresses in fancy clothes.) Śrī Kṛṣṇa sat in a hidden place eavesdropping on the sakhīs’ speech and beautiful-eyed Rādhā’s witty statements. Kṛṣṇa, the cunning rasika, then mulled over how to conquer Rādhā. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.42-52 The beautiful necklaces swaying gently on Rādhā’s breasts and the tinkling anklebells of Her attendant sakhīs combined to spread beauty in every direction as they walked slowly and gracefully through the forest. The bees, attempting to smell the sweet fragrance of the gopīs’ lotus faces, swarmed in the sky and darkened it with their fluttering wings. Wherever Rādhā cast Her furtive glances, it seemed to rain petals of blue lotuses that satisfied the excited bees. Rādhā’s bodily effulgence, which was more brilliant than lightning in a clear blue sky, fully illuminated whatever it contacted, just as the full moon illuminates the dark night. Wherever the rays from Rādhā’s moonlike toenails danced upon the bosom of the earth, the cakora birds, even in the daytime, opened their beaks to plunder that moonlight. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.71-75 Kṛṣṇa became intoxicated with eagerness to meet Rādhikā after drinking the wine of Her

/Q: incomparable beauty. Due to His rapture, Kṛṣṇa totally forgot that He had ever seen Rādhā before. Kṛṣṇa regained His awareness and noticed that the crest-jewel of all the Vraja-gopīs was picking His flowers. His mind racing with bliss, Kṛṣṇa slowly approached Rādhā and asked, “Who are You? Why are You deliberately disturbing My bower?” Rādhā glanced at Kṛṣṇa, who had restless eyes and gorocana tilaka [yellow pigment made from a cow’s bile] on His forehead, and said, “I am picking flowers for sun worship. Why are You objecting?” Rādhā fully covered Her beautiful head with Her veil and walked away on the pretext of picking flowers. Rādhā looked here and there with restless eyes. She spotted a jasmine bush with thick foliage growing on the bank of Rādhā-kunda. Rādhikā, Her lotus-face glowing from the influence of love, approached that jasmine bush and disappeared within its dense foliage, unlimited flowers and swarms of bees. Stavamālā, svayam utprekṣita-līlā 7-10 Kṛṣṇa said, “Hey doe-eyed woman! Now I have understood that everyday You are secretly stealing flowers. You thief! By good fortune, I caught You today. Now do not be obstinate; just come along with Me to the prisonhouse cave.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 15.240 Kṛṣṇa followed Kiśorī and forcefully inquired, “O woman with a lovely moonlike face! Why have You come to My garden to pick flowers? You are cruelly breaking the shoots on the trees in My garden and uprooting all the tender creepers. Why are You causing disturbance?” Rādhā replied, “Everyday, I pick flowers for worship in this lonely forest. Until now, no one has forbidden Me. Why are You so angrily trying to prevent Me today? O lotus-eyed boy! Please forgive Me and be satisfied with Me. I do not know how to use rough words like You. I have been sent here to pick flowers for an important occasion in My house. Now I must quickly return home.” Kṛṣṇa: “For many days, King Cupid has engaged Me in protecting this charming garden. If I catch anyone stealing even half of a withered leaf from a tree in this garden, I must punish them severely by removing all their clothing and ornaments! O You golden thief! Today, I have understood that it is You who has been cutting the flowers and new shoots in My garden. Now I have caught You, so how can You go home?” Rādhā: “O lord of men! My husband always finds fault with Me and gives Me excrutiating pain. My grandmother Mukharā speaks very harshly and My mother-in-law cuts Me with sharp words. Please do not create difficulties for Me like they do. Both of Us will be criticized if We tarry in this secluded place. O lotus-eyed one! Do not spoil the reputation of an innocent, chaste girl. Look, the sun’s rays are gradually declining, therefore, do not obstruct My path.” Kṛṣṇa: “O golden one, radiant as lightning! You have stolen many things from King Cupid. You must be hiding thousands of jasmine flowers in Your hair and millions of mādhavī flowers in Your bodice. Just come here and I will search You. You can go home after showing Me whatever You have taken.” Rādhā: “O Mādhava! I offer respects to You again and again. Do not keep arguing with Me. You claim to be Cupid’s servant but that is a lie. Everyone in Gokula knows that You are Cupid Himself! Your mischievous nature is not unknown to Me. “O You cheater, do not deceive Me. Everyone knows that the garden belongs to My dear friend Vṛndā and therefore it is called Vṛndāvana. Cupid has no jursidiction here. Because We have all rights here We will continue picking the pretty flowers from Vṛnda’s garden. How can You prevent Us?” Kṛṣṇa said, “O woman with beautiful breasts like water pots! Do not talk like that here! By nature,

/Q: King Cupid is cruel and angry. If he finds out that some young women have spoiled his garden, he will severely punish them. He will pierce Your body with his arrows, and as Cupid’s servant I will forcibly attack Your lips. “O You, who possess such a gorgeous body! If You are really in a hurry to go home, just listen to My suggestion. Come into My cottage in the bower, which is protected by many courageous soldiers in the form of intoxicated bees. There You will have no fear.” Rādhā: “O cheater! My name is Rādhikā! I am anointed with the balm of pristine character. In Gokula, I am most famous for My chastity, therefore, all the women of Vraja respect Me. What are You so whimsically proposing?” Kṛṣṇa: “O My dear one! Why are You frowning at Me so ferociously? Why are You looking at Me askance and becoming angry with Me, though I am loved by all? I think that You have affection for Me, since You have come to the forest and Your cheeks are flushed with desire. Somehow, You have fallen into the hands of Hari. Is there anyone in the world who can free You from Hari (lion)? “O most beautiful woman! Just forget about going home and come to My forest cottage. You are displaying a lot of arrogance among Your friends. Now, King Cupid is quickly approaching. If You are afraid of Him, just give Me Your bodice. If You satisfy Me, Cupid will not punish You.” Stavamālā, svayam utprekṣita-līlā 12-28 Rādhā relished Kṛṣṇa’s jokes about stealing and His witty praises of Her beauty like a shower of nectar for Her ears. As a result, Rādhā’s divine body spontaneously displayed all the symptoms of ecstatic love (sāttvika-bhāvas), which She suppressed and concealed only with great effort. Rādhā smiled and softly said, “What beautiful lover would listen to the exaggerated ramblings of a lusty man? I am leaving!” Rādhā contemptuously stared at Her lover Kṛṣṇa from the corners of Her charming eyes. While feigning indifference [the emotional ornament of mugdha vivvoka], Rādhā walked away with a haughty gait. Kṛṣṇa dashed forward, grabbed the edge of Rādhā’s veil and said, “O cunning one! First, You insult Me and then You try to escape. Where do You think You are going so fast?” Tantalized by Kṛṣṇa’s touch, Kiśorī’s body surged with various ecstacies. Yet to divert Kṛṣṇa’s attention, Rādhā tilted Her head and looked sharply at Her beloved. Who can possibly describe the sweetness of Rādhā’s glance at that time? Rādhā’s crooked glance soared toward the lotus face of Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā quickly withdrew Her glance again and looked away like a fickle honeybee showing indifference toward a lotus flower. Kṛṣṇa’s pulling Her veil made Rādhikā’s eyes shed a few tear drops of anxiety that reddened their borders. Rādhā immersed Kṛṣṇa in a shoreless ocean of transcendental bliss with Her neglectful, crooked glances. Rādhā, blinded by intense desire, forcibly pulled Her veil away from Kṛṣṇa’s grasp. Rādhā pierced Kṛṣṇa’s heart with Cupid’s arrows shot from the corners of Her agitated eyes. Rādhikā became overwhelmed in ecstatic love. She then addressed Kṛṣṇa, whose splendid lotus face was adorned with a gentle smile rivaling the sweetest nectar: “Kṛṣṇa! You call Us thieves, but do think that You are some kind of saint? Your magnificently sweet body has plundered the charm of every beautiful object within the material and spiritual worlds. What more can I say? The virgin gopīs who bathed naked in the Yamunā can testify to Your saintliness and strict adherence to dharma. Why did they have to pray to You with hands folded above their heads to get back their clothing?

/Q: “As the worshipable, dashing young son of the king, You are adorned with many virtuous qualities and could have married any one of countless young girls here in Vraja. Since You never married we can understand that actually You are a debauch, so no decent girl wants to marry You. Hence, out of frustration You have hastily adopted the guise of a brahmacārī. Your celibacy is like that of a horse that loses all self-control immediately upon seeing a mare. Thus, You are famous in Vraja as a pseudo brahmacārī. “If You really are such a staunch brahmacārī, why are You so eager to gaze upon the faces of young married girls? Moreover, why do You allure them with the enchanting songs of Your flute, which steal their minds like a thief? I think You falsely pose as a celibate brahmacārī just to trick others. Actually, the only vow You follow is how to break the chastity of the maidens and young wives of Vraja. Govinda-līlāmṛta 9.39-50 “O brahmacārī! This flower garden is especially meant for women to relax and play. What business do You have here? You should immediately leave, join Your boyfriends and run along with Your cows to the green pastures of Vraja. Govinda-līlāmṛta 9.56 “What a joke! You never planted a single flower, vine or tree sapling in the forest, yet You claim to be its proprietor. Moreover, Your cows gobble up all the grass and trample down the flowers, vines and everything else growing here. Still You boldly proclaim to be the protector of the forest! Because the forest is maintained by My sakhī Vṛndā, it is famous as Vṛndāvana. Everyone knows that when I was bathed in jewel water and crowned the Queen of Vṛndāvana, Vṛndā handed the forest over to Me. Therefore, how can You claim that You and King Cupid are its protectors!” Govinda-līlāmṛta 9.51- 52 Kṛṣṇa, intoxicated from drinking the nectar of Rādhā’s pleasing words, smiled as He said, “Vṛndā, who is sweeter and more charming than hundreds of Lakṣmīs, is My chaste wife. If You do not believe Me, ask her in private. If You say, ‘What if she is My wife,’ then listen. The Vedas proclaim that there is not the slightest difference between a husband and his wife. Therefore, when the people of the three worlds say that the forest bears the name Vṛndā, that word Vṛndā refers to both of Us.” Rādhā greatly relished Kṛṣṇa’s nectarean words. Turning to Vṛndā, Kiśorī whispered, “Vṛndā is this true or not? Please tell Me! How astonishing! If it is true and you are too embarrassed to say it in front of your sakhīs, then leave this place on a pretense of anger. We will then use clever words to vanquish this fake guru Kṛṣṇa.” Doe–eyed Vṛndā showed false anger by frowning with red eyes at the sakhīs. Vṛndā replied to the arrogant Kṛṣṇa, “O eunuch of Padmā! O laughing-stock of the town of Vraja! If You wish to become the king of a nice forest, then leave the forest of Vraja without delay. Go to Sakhīsthalī and worship Your wife Candrāvalī (a form of Durgā). If she is satisfied, she will give You a grove of badarī trees [a wild tasteless berry] as Your kingdom.” Stavāvali,
/R: kusuma-keli 8- 1
-L: Rādhā’s ownership of the forest
/Q: Vṛndā eloquently praised Rādhā’s beauty and virtues by comparing them to many other things. She also established Rādhā’s sovereignty over Vṛndāvana and at last rebuked Kṛṣṇa. Vṛndā said, “Simply the reflection of Rādhā’s face is more attractive than a host of lotus flowers. Her eyes are more beautiful than swaying lotuses or the restless eyes of the deer. Rādhā’s slightly raised nose is more elegant than the beak of a baby parrot. Rādhikā’s glistening red lips decry the splendid

/Q: beauty of blossoming bandhūka flowers. “Kiśorī’s teeth are more praiseworthy than white jasmine flowers and red pomegranate seeds. Rādhā’s gentle smile conqures the elegance of a forest of white lotuses. Her gracefully curved ears are more attractive than circles of braided muñjā grass. Rādhārāṇī’s forehead surpasses the beauty of the best baka flowers. The vines of Her restless eyebrows defeat the attraction of a line of black bees. Her kuṅkuma ointment is more resplendent than a host of ripe jambū fruits. The splendor of Rādhā’s hair is greater than the fanned tailfeathers of a love-maddened peacock. Rādhā’s soft voice is sweeter than the cuckoo warbling high notes in spring. “Rādhā’s hips are heavier than a mountain range and Her raised breasts are firmer than ripe bilva fruits. Her arms are more graceful than blossoming creepers. Kiśorī’s beautiful hair is more splendid than a glistening black snake. Rādhā’s shapely thighs are more attractive than rows of banana trees. Her walking is more charming than the graceful movements of a royal swan. Rādhikā’s lotus feet are more beautiful than a forest of blossoming land lotuses. In the town of Vraja, Rādhārāṇī is eternally more munificent than a forest of kalpa-vṛkṣa trees. “The tears of love flowing continually from Rādhā’s eyes and the drops of perspiration falling from Her transcendental body defeat the splendor of gold. They are more spectacular than the rushing currents of the Mānasa Gāṅgā, Yamunā and all other rivers and lakes. Rādhikā’s bodily hair standing erect in ecstasy is more dazzling than the filaments of blossoming kadamba flowers. Rādhārāṇī’s divine body is more fragrant than a host of campaka or golden yūthī flowers. Kiśorī’s shining chest is more glorious than an incomparable king’s throne. The lovely darting of Rādhā’s eyes is more charming than a flock of khañjana birds. Rādhā’s aura is more praiseworthy than a golden mountain. “My Lord, the forest of Vṛndāvana is only the pale reflection of the glory of Rādhā’s divine form. Therefore, how can You claim that the forest belongs to You? The lotuses and other flowers here are as elegant as the face and limbs of Śrī Rādhā. The forest of Vṛndāvana is famous in this world for being as sweet and lovely as Rādhā. The forest has a charming form like Rādhārāṇī, therefore, it has manifested as Rādhā’s splendid reflection. Because it is the place of Her transcendental pastimes, it is Rādhā’s friend. In this way, the forest of Vṛndāvana is eternally Rādhā’s reflection and friend. There is no contradiction.” Rādhā, aroused by the nectar of Vṛndā’s prayers, trembled with a great thirst to enact the dance of amorous love. With deep yearning Rādhā glanced at the dance master Kṛṣṇa. Viśākhā, overcome by loving feelings and her bodily hair erect with joy, embraced Rādhā, who was smiling shyly from Vṛndā’s prayers. Viśākhā happily showered flowers on Vṛndā’s head. She laughed slightly while glancing at Kṛṣṇa and scolding Him. Stavāvali,
/R: kusuma-keli 12-23
-L: A clever conversation
/Q: Kṛṣṇa thoroughly enjoyed the sweet talks. Smiling, Mādhava laughingly said, “The limbs of your friend Rādhā have stolen the splendid treasure of My charming Vṛndāvana and made it fade and wilt. O liar, how do you expect to protect your friend Rādhā with the ruse of claiming that She is identical with Vṛndāvana? If your sakhī’s virtues far exceed the glory of Vṛndāvana, why does Rādhā stoop down to pick the insignificant flowers here? Rādhā is a confirmed thief! She will never cease hankering after other’s property. “O Viśākhā! By glorifying Kiśorī and claiming that Her beauty is reflected in Vṛndāvana, I think you

/Q: are trying to give Her to Me. How is it possible? Rādhā is very chaste and faithful to Her husband. If he comes himself and gives Rādhā to Me, I will accept Her as Mine.” The playful nectar waves of the Svarga Gaṅgā of these wonderful and charming crooked words rocked the firm boat of Rādhā’s heart. Lalitā and all the gopīs smiled. Lalitā quipped, “If a person traveling in a desert cannot find even a drop of bitter salt water to quench his thirst, suddenly aspires to drink the heavenly nectar praised by Brahmā and available only in Amarāvatī [Indra’s capitol], the whole world will certainly laugh at him.” The sakhīs gazed curiously from the corners of their eyes at Vrajarāja Kumāra (Vraja’s prince), the topmost expert in relishing transcendental mellows. Rādhā addressed them, “O sakhīs! Kṛṣṇa already has many mistresses. Kālī and Śaibyā are the least important of His mistresses. Padmā, who is like a great treasure (mahāpadmā), is in the middle. The most important is Goddess Candrāvalī, whose beautiful breasts inflame Him with lusty desires. What need has Kṛṣṇa for any new mistresses?” Stavāvali, kusuma-keli 24-28 Hari, like a cakora bird, eagerly drank the flood of nectarean joking words flowing from Rādhārāṇī’s refreshing, beautifully smiling moonlike face, decorated with the dancing does of Her eyes. With their cakorī eyes, the sakhīs drank the ambrosial darśana of the Divine Couple to their full satisfaction. Radhika bent Her neck out of fear that Kṛṣṇa might touch Her. She worshiped Śyāma with the blue lotuses of Her crooked glances. Rādhikā playfully showed indifference by uttering unclear threatening words as He slowly walked away from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa beheld the luscious dancing movements of Rādhā’s body and became agitated with amorous desires. With uncontrolled eagerness, He grabbed the edge of Her bodice. Rādhā in turn pierced the armor of Kṛṣṇa’s patience with the firey arrows of Her glances shot from the bow of Her raised eye brows. Rādhā repeatedly beat Kṛṣṇa with Her pastime lotus flower (līlā-kamala). Rādhā’s heroic assault on behalf of Cupid immersed Kṛṣṇa in a fathomless ocean of joy. Although Kṛṣṇa holds the entire universe within Himself, He could not contain the ecstasy He felt from being beaten by Rādhā’s lotus flower. Thus, He started trembling and perspiring. Tears poured from His eyes and His bodily hair stood erect. Kṛṣṇa’s touch made Rādhārāṇī’s transcendental body blossom with happiness. The strings holding Her bodice loosened and the sash on Her waist slipped off. Her fine undergarments remained on Her hips only by the moisture of Her perspiration. Rādhā felt great distress while struggling to brush away Kṛṣṇa’s hand and hold up Her undergarments at the same time. Somehow, Rādhā broke free from Kṛṣṇa’s grasp and ran away while holding up Her undergarments with Her right hand. The gopīs giggled briefly upon beholding this with their restless smiling eyes. Excessive enticement induced Kṛṣṇa to begin the Kandarpa Yajña (sacrifice to Cupid). Just as leaves are placed atop golden kumbhas (waterpots) to initiate a yajña, Śyāma placed His leaf-like hands on the golden waterpots of Kiśorī’s breasts, glowing with perspiration and kuṅkuma. Rādhikā quickly pushed Kṛṣṇa’s hands away while glaring at Him from the ruddy corner of Her left eye. Rādhā frantically held up Her undergarment, and nervously glanced at Her smiling girlfriends with Her other eye. Although Radhika longed for Śyāma’s embrace, She showed a contrary mood by chastising Her lover with unclear words in a faltering voice mixed with laughing and crying. Rādhā glimpsed at Kṛṣṇa

/Q: with crooked eyes while deflecting His hand to prevent Him from fulfilling His desires. A great struggle broke out between the hands of Rādhā and the hands of Śyāma. Their two hands, with Their pleasantly tinkling bracelets, appeared like two lotus flowers surrounded by buzzing bees tossed by the wind. Govinda-līlāmṛta 9.57-67 Rādhikā simultaneously smiled and cried while rebuking Kṛṣṇa in a faltering voice. Somehow, She freed Herself from Kṛṣṇa’s grip and stood angrily before Him.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 10.7
-L: Kṛṣṇa embraces Rādhā
/Q: A swarm of bees appeared by coincidence, and eagerly tried to relish the wonderful fragrance of Rādhā’s lotus mouth. Rādhā became frightened by their steady drone and looked about anxiously. Losing Her composure, Rādhikā tightly embraced Her Prāṇanātha for protection. Rādhikā, seeing the sakhīs smiling over this, felt embarrassed and tried to slip out of Śyāma’s embrace. Kṛṣṇa laughed and squeezed Rādhā so tightly that She could not possibly escape. Rādhā looked more stunning than a streak of lightning permanently resting on a rain cloud. All the goddesses of emotion, such as īrṣyā (envy) lajjā (shyness), harṣa (joy) and vāmatā (opposition) manifested in Rādhā’s body, mind and words with a desire to sport. Rādhikā simultaneously smiled and cried. She spoke clever puns mixed with curses, prayers, loud criticisms and humble apologies. Kṛṣṇa and all the gopīs delighted in the display of Rādhā’s variegated emotions. Rādhārāṇī struggled with both hands and finally freed Herself from the firm embrace of Her lover. Rādhā’s actions thoroughly pleased Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs. The sakhīs blossomed with happiness, trembled and showed other signs of ecstatic bliss upon seeing Rādhā-Mādhava wrapped in a warm embrace. Vṛndā commented to Nāndīmukhī in the bower: “Just see the magic! The gopīs are not being hugged or even touched by Hari. Yet they shiver in bliss when Kṛṣṇa strongly embraces Rādhārāṇī for a long time. Moreover, when the sakhīs cannot see Kṛṣṇa, they long for Him, and upon seeing Kṛṣṇa they want to touch Him. When Kṛṣṇa touches them, however, they become angry and contrary. Indeed, their actions are most astonishing!” Nāndīmukhī replied, “The behavior of the fair-browed Vraja-gopīs is not so amazing, for they are not of the world. Their transcendental minds and bodies exist only for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa, whom they serve at every moment. Look, the sakhīs delight in Rādhā’s happiness because they are both the hladini-śakti (pleasure potency) of Kṛṣṇa, the energizing moon for the lily-like ladies of Vraja. “The essence of hlādinī śakti is prema, which is comparable to a vine. Rādhikā is the personification of that prema-latā (love-vine) and the sakhīs are its sprouts, leaves and flowers. When the Rādhā prema-latā is sprinkled with the sweet nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, the sakhīs become a hundred times happier than if sprinkled directly themselves. Actually, it is not so astonishing. “O Vṛndā! The all-pervading Lord cannot be satisfied without His cit śakti. Similarly, Rādhā- Govinda’s self-manifest, blissful love cannot be nourished without the association of Their affectionate sakhīs. Which devotee knowledgeable of rasa would not take shelter of the sakhīs? Rādhā is as beautiful as a blossoming golden vine and Kṛṣṇa is as handsome as a budding tamāla tree. Will Their union not give bliss to all living beings?

/Q: “The beautiful fair-browed Vraja-gopīs, their hearts softened by prema, are the purest devotees of Kṛṣṇa. They have absolutely no other interest in life than giving pleasure to Kṛṣṇa. Whenever they show reluctance to unite with Kṛṣṇa, it is simply to increase His happiness.” Rādhā drowned in waves of happiness from the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s arms and hard chest. Though Rādhā desired nothing more, outwardly She showed a mood of opposition. Rādhā admonished Lalitā, “O crooked, shameless Lalitā! After conspiring with Hari’s sly messenger Kundāvallī, You brought Me here and placed Me in the hands of the family guru of deceit with a wink of your eyes. You are now showing neutrality while the cheater enacts His impudent dance performance. “My dear Lalitā, although you are generally sharp and passionate by nature, I see that Kṛṣṇa’s strong embrace has made you gentle and good-natured. Kṛṣṇa in turn has become sharp and passionate. The sudden change is not so astonishing because You two have simply reversed Your natures.” Lalitā was inwardly satisfied with Kṛṣṇa’s touching Rādhā. Nevertheless, she cleverly countered Rādhā’s charges by smiling proudly and vehemently criticising Kṛṣṇa with a barrage of spicy words. Lalitā said, “O arrogant king who destroys the vows of chaste women! What are You trying to do?” Kṛṣṇa responded, “Lalitā! It is all Her doing. You should ask your friend Rādhārāṇī why She suddenly embraced Me and forcibly pressed Her body against Mine?”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 10.8-24
-L: Lalitā jokes with Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Lalitā cleverly replied, “The golden mādhavī creeper (Rādhā) is now flowering, so it is normal for Her to embrace the punnāga tree (or the best man). However, I have never seen a punnāga tree entwining a mādhavī creeper! Creepers embrace trees but trees never embrace creepers. Therefore, we see no fault in our dear sakhī’s behavior. She has simply followed Her nature.” Kṛṣṇa rejoined, “O Lalitā! I have donated My body to Rādhā and She accepted it. What is the harm for you? Besides, the scriptures proclaim that one should never take back a gift. Therefore, I cannot take back My body.” Pointing to her chest, Lalitā berated Kṛṣṇa, “My name is Lalitā! I am angry, courageous and cruel. O cheater! Just release this famous chaste lady, if You want to keep Your reputation. Kṛṣṇa! You are nothing but a libidinous bumblebee. To satisfy Your inflamed desire to enjoy other’s property, You can go to Your niece Kundalatā. In my presence, even the wind cannot touch my dear sakhī Rādhā. So let Her go or else brace Yourself for my attack!” Seeing Lalitā’s angry face as she and the sakhīs boldly approached Him, Kṛṣṇa became conquered by ecstasy and manifested symptoms like weeping, trembling and erect standing of His bodily hair.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 10.25-29
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (11:36 a.m.—12:00 p.m.)
-L: Flute stealing pastimes
/Q: Rādhā’s touch enchanted Kṛṣṇa so much that His hands started trembling, causing Him to loosen His hold on Rādhārāṇī and unknowingly drop His flute. Kiśorī slipped out of Śyāma’s embrace, quickly picked up the flute and carefully hid it under Her garments. All the sakhīs thought that Kṛṣṇa had dropped His flute and released Rādhā out of fear of Lalitā.

/Q: Lalitā said, “Hey sakhī! It is remarkable that no other gopī has been able to steal the flute from Nandanandana, even while He sleeps. Yet the fortunate Rādhā, bewildering Kṛṣṇa with the art of Her sidelong glance, has stolen the flute right before His very eyes.” Rādhā whispered to Herself, “This is the same flute which paralyzes the gopīs’ hands when they perform household chores. At night, the flute attracts the golden-complexioned gopīs, even from the laps of their husbands. The brazen flute loosens the strings of the gopīs’ underwear, even in front of their elders! Now, Kṛṣṇa’s naughty flute is under My control.” Vidagdha-mādhava 4.34-35 Rādhā continued, “O flute, who is so dear to Kṛṣṇa! When you grant Me your mercy, I will give you many benedictions in return. I will bless you, saying, ‘May you become faultless. May your heart overflow with the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips. May you become very eloquent. May you become charmingly slender. May you become the object of Mādhava’s worship.’ “O flute, you have blessed Me by giving Me the emptiness in your heart, your lightness, the dryness of your body and your eloquence in constantly chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, the king of Vraja. Why are You not giving Me the nectar of Govinda’s lips, which you drink continually and then turn into a song that shamelessly enchants and subjugates the entire world?” Padyāvalī 255-256 Rādhārāṇī moved away slowly while carefully concealing the flute in the folds of Her garment. Viśākhā stood between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and said, “Kṛṣṇa! With Your Rāhu-like hands, You forcibly tried to capture the Rādhā star. But Rāhu only catches the moon (Candrāvalī) and he can never touch a star. Therefore, You cannot embrace the Rādhā star or Her star-like girlfriends.” Viśākhā indicated the different stars in the sky after which most of the gopīs are named, and then continued, “I am Viśākhā, non-different from Rādhā. Lalitā’s second name is Anurādhā (another star). Here is Jyeṣṭhā (second name of Dhaniṣṭhā), Citrā and Bharaṇī. There are other girls too like lndulekha, however, since she is a mere moonbeam, she is not fit for enjoyment. Rāhu should embrace the full moon, so why don’t You go to Candrāvalī (a row of moons)?” Kṛṣṇa replied, “O Viśākhā! You are truly Śaṅkarī, the bestower of immeasurable bliss, or the auspicious better half of Lord Śiva. And Lalitā’s terrifying thunderbolt words make her the real Indra. “Rāhu has left the moon (Candrāvalī) after easily attaining and enjoying her many times before. Now I yearn to taste the nectar of the goddess Bhānavī (Rādhā, daughter of Vṛṣabhānu), who is very rarely attained! Rāhu has gradually enjoyed all the stars. Now he desires to taste the incomparable moonbeams (Indulekhā) too.” Hari tried to forcibly embrace Indulekhā, but she ran away in fear. Knitting her eyebrows, Indulekhā laughingly said, “O insolent Rāhu! Indulekha is unfit for You, so go enjoy Candrāvalī or all the stars.” Kṛṣṇa followed her advice, approached Lalitā and tried to grab her from behind. Lalitā stopped Him saying,”Without enjoying Viśākhā first, Anurādhā (Lalitā’s second name) cannot be attained!” (Anurādhā constellation comes after Viśākhā in the sky.) When Kṛṣṇa touched Viśākha, she blurted out, “If You have enjoyed Rādhā (second name of Viśākhā constellation), then Viśākhā has also been enjoyed because we are non-different. O king of the shameless! You are trying to enjoy in the wrong order again. Why have you accosted me for a second time before satisfying the superior star Jyeṣṭhā (the next constellation after Anurādhā and Dhaniṣṭhā’s second name)?” Kṛṣṇa managed to embrace Dhaniṣṭhā (Jyeṣṭhā), however, she got angry and berated Him with unclear

/Q: words: “Hey shameless one, how dare You! Your attempts with others will continue to fail until You enjoy Citrā-sakhī.” When Kṛṣṇa suddenly caught Citrā, she shouted, “O lecher! Just get out of here! The stars cannot be enjoyed in whatever way You choose. You must follow a process and not deviate from Your course.” Tuṅgavidyā said, “O Citrā! We cannot say that Rāhu has broken the rules. Due to his curving course, sometimes he attacks planets by surprise!” Citrā countered, “O Tuṅgavidyā, you are Libra sign. If Rāhu attacks Citrā, soon you will also suffer.” (Citrā constellation is partly in Virgo and partly in Libra sign.) When Kṛṣṇa touched Tuṅgavidyā, she said, “My dear impudent libertine! Raṅgadevī is the real Libra. So why have You overlooked her?” Upon being touched, Raṅgadevī said, “O Rāhu! You are now enjoying Virgo (the sign before Libra) By aspect, cast Your glance and You can also torture the Pisces sign (opposite sign to Virgo), namely Campakalatā.” Kṛṣṇa suddenly grabbed Campakalatā, who snapped, “What audacity! You should immediately go to the Aquarius sign, Sūdevī, to complete Your course!” When Kṛṣṇa touched her, Sudevī punned, “O Madhusūdana (honeybee)! The flowering Kāñcanalatā will fulfill all Your desires!” When Kṛṣṇa caressed Kāñcanalatā, she said, “Why has a black cakora bird like You come here to a golden vine (kāñcanalatā)? Go at once to Candramukhī (moonfaced girl, Rādhārāṇī) and quench Your thirst by drinking the moonlight of Her beauty.” Kṛṣṇa, driven by the desire to kiss Rādhikā, rushed up to Her. Rādhā turned Her head away while exclaiming, “O cheater! If You want to kiss someone, leave other’s wives alone and just kiss Your beloved flute!” Kṛṣṇa suddenly remembered His flute, which had fallen from His hand long ago, and said, “Hey, where’s My flute?” Dumbfounded for a moment, Kṛṣṇa glanced toward Kundalatā. Kundalatā indicated to Kṛṣṇa with her eyes that Rādhā had the flute. Rādhā secretly passed the flute to Tulasī, who carefully hid it and stood behind Lalitā and Viśākhā. Kṛṣṇa, yearning to embrace Rādhārāṇī, said, “O thief! My mind is always pure and peaceful. But You stunned Me with the goad weapon of Your amorous glances. While I was bewildered, You stole My flute without My knowledge. Indeed, it is very wonderful! I shall now bind You with the ropes of My arms, plunder Your clothes and ornaments, lock You in the kuñja prison and turn You over to king Cupid.” Rādhā’s body rippled with waves of bliss from Śyāma’s joking. Yet feigning indifference, Rādhā’s glance told Śyāma, “Don’t touch Me!” and She walked away. Though Rādhā fended Him off, Kṛṣṇa forcibly grabbed Her on the pretext of searching for His stolen property. Kṛṣṇa said, “O thief! Why are You vainly trying to slip out of My arms? I will not let You go until You return My flute!” Lalitā pretended to be angry by contracting her bow-like eyebrows, casting a sharp glance and smiling with sublime arrogance. She stood before Hari in a threatening manner and blasted Him: “O polluted libertine, who destroys the chastity of newly married girls! Go away! Rādhā has just bathed

/Q: to purify Herself for Sūrya-pūjā. So don’t You dare contaminate Her with Your touch! “Listen You drunken scoundrel! Śaibyā snatched Your flute at Kusuma Sarovara when You were intoxicated from Her kisses. If You do not believe me, ask Tulasī who witnessed the entire affair. When criminals misbehave the innocent get blamed. Just see, even though Śaibyā is the culprit, innocent Rādhā gets blamed!” Lalitā hinted to Kṛṣṇa with a glance that Tulasī now had the flute. As Kṛṣṇa shifted His attention to Tulasī, Rādhā escaped from His embrace, like the nectarean moon leaving the grip of a dark cloud. Tulasī detected Lalitā’s hint so she secretly passed the flute to Rūpa-mañjarī. Tulasī tried to leave but Kṛṣṇa forcefully grabbed her, making her tremble and horripilate. Tulasī folded her hands in supplication, placed them over her face and cried piteously, “O merciful one! Let me go. I am Your insignificant maidservant. I do not have the flute to which You are so attached. In fact, just today I saw Your flute in the hands of Śaibyā.” Tulasī pointed her eyes toward Rūpa-mañjarī. Madhuṣūdana released Tulasī-mañjarī and accosted Rūpa-mañjarī. Clever Rūpa-mañjarī understood that she bore the unmistakable honey fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. Instantly she passed it to Lalitā and stood there innocently. Kṛṣṇa, without a moments notice, strongly embraced Rūpa-mañjarī and searched her bodice for the flute. Kṛṣṇa exclaimed, “Hey thief! Where did you hide My flute?” Rūpa-mañjarī tried to block Kṛṣṇa’s hands while proclaimimg, “Am I the thief! Did You find Your flute on me? Today, by good fortune You have fulfilled Your desire to fondle my breasts and embrace me. Go now and call all the gopīs here with Your flute. You Yourself have hidden the flute. Searching for the flute was simply Your trick to rape the chaste wives of others.” Rūpa-mañjarī’s eyes hinted to Kṛṣṇa that Lalitā had the flute. Seeing Kṛṣṇa releasing Tulasī from His embrace, Lalitā secretly slipped the flute to Kundalatā. When Kṛṣṇa got near, Lalitā furiously shrieked, “Look out! Just keep Your distance and stop where You are. I do not have Your enchanting flute. Look, I am warning You! You will suffer heavy losses if You become too lusty. Rascal! Why would Rādhā’s sakhīs, who will not even touch cintāmaṇi gems with their feet, covet Your insignificant flute? “That dry wooden flute is filled with holes (faults) because it maddens the three worlds with its enchanting sound. Moreover, You are the husband of that muralī (flute). It is good news for everyone that it has been lost. Now that they will no longer be stunned by Your flute, the Vraja-gopīs can keep their braids and undergarments tied and peacefully do their chores, the does can peacefully graze with their husbands and the rivers can flow to the ocean in their natural courses. “You lost Your muralī because You stole the clothes of the naked maidens, and made them suffer in the cold waters of the Yamunā. Those who give suffering to others will suffer themselves. Oh, what a pity! That eighteen-inch flute, which is just a dry bamboo reed filled with holes, has been stolen. Alas! Alas! Now everything is lost for the king of Gokula.” Lalitā’s derisive sarcasm stunned and depressed Kṛṣṇa. Kundalatā considered Kṛṣṇa’s gloom to be merely a clever trick. She secretly gave the flute to Rādhā and slyly said, “Alas Rādhikā! Who has stolen Kṛṣṇa’s flute?” Kundalatā feelingly spoke to Kṛṣṇa with the intention of showing her friendship: “O Kṛṣṇa! What can I say? Is there any loss if an old piece of bamboo full of holes and hardly worth a few cents goes

/Q: missing? Why are You lamenting the loss of an insignificant flute? Take it as a blessing. However, knowing that You are the prince of the cowherds, I am practically dying of shame to see how all the Vraja-gopīs laughing at You and playfully taunting You.” Kṛṣṇa said, “Kundalatā! You do not understand My beloved flute and thus you ridicule its glories. That is not surprising, because its qualities have not been revealed to You as they have been to the other damsels of Vraja. Kundalatā! What more can I say about the flute’s qualities? Just as the spiritual potency of Lord Nārāyaṇa fulfills all His desires, similarly, My flute fulfills whatever impossible to obtain desire may arise in My heart. Therefore, the flute is My all-powerful well- wisher. Rādhikā and Her sakhīs are well aware of its extraordinary power.” Lalitā said, “O Kṛṣṇa! The flute is very skillful at lascivious conduct. She is Your lover and knows all about Your lusty desires. We know her very well. The stream of nectar of Your flute binds the wild elephants of the gopīs’ hearts and steals their spotless piety. What to speak of other ladies, even Ramā, Gaurī and Saṁjñā (wife of the sun) are enthralled by it. Your flute is famous in the three planetary systems for its outstanding qualities.” Kṛṣṇa said, “First the haughty Lalitā, who is a thorny fortress of crooked words, secretly stole My flute. And now she criticizes both Me and My flute!” Kṛṣṇa tried to grab the edge of Lalitā’s sārī but she quickly retreated. Lalitā knitted her creeper-like eyebrows as if she were angry and replied to smiling Kṛṣṇa: “My dear Kṛṣṇa! I am Lalitā and You know me very well in many ways! Now, I am leaving with my friends so that Your deceptive tricks will not succeed.” Kṛṣṇa snatched Lalitā’s veil when she started to go and exclaimed, “Without returning My flute, I will not let you go so easily. O Lalitā, if You have not stolen the flute, why do you flee in fear? Of course, you can go if you like. However, if you want to clear your reputation, you must stay here and show Me each of your limbs one by one to prove that you have not concealed the flute on your body.” Lalitā forcibly jerked her veil out of Kṛṣṇa’s hand. She cast a crooked glance and angrily scoffed, “Lusty madman! Go search the body of Your cousin Kundalata! We have neither taken Your flute nor seen it. If You are so cruel that You will not leave us alone, then tell us Your price and we will pay You through Kundalatā! If that is not sufficient to cover Your loss we will make You another flute. “O Kṛṣṇa! The two Pulinda girls named Mallī and Bhṛṅgī living at Govardhana are our friends. If we tell them, they will serve You by bringing a hollow bamboo stick to replace Your flute. The stick will be far superior to Your flute and it will not be faulted by all those holes.” Kṛṣṇa feelingly replied, “The Pulinda girls are most fortunate because they have intense attraction for Me. They collect the kuṅkuma that falls from My feet onto the grass and smear it on their faces and breasts to satisfy their lusty desires. They also bring Me guñja seeds and mineral pigments from Govardhana Hill. They are My maidservants. How have they become your friends? Lalitā! First, you steal My flute and then you insult Me. In retaliation, I shall bind you and punish you severely. Is there anyone who can stop Me?” Viśākhā accepted Kṛṣṇa’s challenge and forcibly pulled Lalitā back. She then stood before Kṛṣṇa and offered a humble suggestion: “O Kṛṣṇa! If one loses his belongings, he can hire a detective to recover them. Keep a cool brain! Cruel punishment of the gopīs will not help You find Your flute.” Campakalatā added, “Detectives are also greedy for money. Why would Kṛṣṇa spend so much just to

/Q: recover a worthless piece of bamboo?” Tuṅgavidyā said, “O foolish Campakalatā! You do not know what is at stake. Now listen to my verdict. This flute is priceless; it is Kṛṣṇa’s all in all. There is nothing He will not give to get it back. However, try to understand what will happen. The detective will help Kṛṣṇa catch the thief and recover His flute. The detective’s reward will be plundered from the thief’s personal property. This is Kṛṣṇa’s policy.” Viśākhā said, “O Kṛṣṇaji! Since You are the owner of the flute, please tell us how You will punish the thief and reward the detective? I am only asking for Your benefit.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “Whoever finds the flute will receive the flower garland from My body (an embrace), My jeweled necklace (love bites and scratches), a karamarda fruit (Indian plum or love play) a cumbaka gem (loadstone or a kiss) and other things too. “I will punish the thief by tying her in the ropes of My embrace and then I will drag her to the nikuñja prison. There I will confiscate her clothes and ornaments and plunder the jewel of youth hidden in her two jugs!” Viśākhā said, “O prince of the cowherds! Your generous reward and punishment are most befitting. Seeing that You are not the least bit miserly, I think You will retrieve Your flute very soon. Only Kundalatā knows the whereabouts of the flute and I learned from her. Since I have not seen it with my eyes, it is difficult for me to speak about it. If You first give a little bribe to Kundalatā, then You may tactfully inquire about the fate of Your flute.” Viśākhā playfully teased Kundalatā, “By good fortune some wealth is coming your way. Tell your cousin where the flute is and receive a very rare reward.” Viśākhā whispered in Kundalatā’s ear. Rādhikā understood the hint so She secretly gave the flute to Tulasī. Kṛṣṇa looked at Kundalatā’s face, eagerly waiting for an answer. Kundalatā addressed Viśākhā, “I swear that I do not know the thief. Do not forget that I am Kṛṣṇa’s relative and not just any outsider like all of you. Therefore, whatever belongs to my cousin Kṛṣṇa also belongs to me. If I knew where to find the flute, I would tell Kṛṣṇa without taking the reward. “O Viśākhā! You certainly know who stole the flute. Tell us who has the flute and take all the jewels. If You cooperate, certainly Kṛṣṇa will regain His flute. You can either take your reward first or find the flute first! I will serve as the mediator for you and Kṛṣṇa concerning the reward and the flute. Do not be afraid!” Kṛṣṇa was intensely anxious to retrieve His flute, so He followed Kundalatā’s eye gestures and approached Rādhārāṇī. However, Rādhārāṇī stunned Kṛṣṇa with the sharpened arrows of many sidelong glances. At that time, Kundalatā spoke the following words to the motionless Kṛṣṇa: “O Kṛṣṇa! The śyāma- rasa flowing from Your flute has turned the entire world bluish-black. Whoever drinks that śyāma- rasa becomes overcome by śṛṅgāra-rasa (the mellow of divine amorous love)! Look, that śyāma- rasa has taken shelter of Rādhā’s chin as a black dot of musk. Rādhā conquered the flute, plundered its śyāma-rasa and placed it on Her chin as the black dot. In Her absorption of seizing the flute, however, foolish Rādhā forgot to hide the dot. She has only hidden the flute. “By good fortune, You have seen the mark of Your flute in the dot on Rādhā’s chin. At once reclaim it with Your lips, then cleverly take back Your flute! Afterwards, You can punish Rādhā for the theft and

/Q: reward the detective. Now that I have proven that Rādhikā has the flute, I do not care if You reclaim it or not. However, Viśākhā, who found the flute, is demanding her reward. Please reward her in my presence.” Kṛṣṇa said, “First I will remove the mark of the flute from Rādhā’s chin and then clear My debt with Viśākhā. I shall then lock Rādhikā in the nikuñja jail, recover My flute and punish Her severely.” Kṛṣṇa eagerly approached Rādhā to bite Her lips. Lalitā boldly stepped between Them and angrily reprimanded the intoxicated romantic hero. With false anger and a smile, Lalitā said, “What a calamity! Kṛṣṇa, You are contaminating Rādhikā so She cannot perform Sūrya-pūjā. Get out of here! Have You lost all respect for the demigods and religious principles?” Hari listened to Lalitā’s preventive words and said, “Hey Rādhe! My teeth are not to be blamed. Rather, the fault lies with You for openly displaying the musk dot on Your chin.” Śyāma forcefully kissed Rādhā, erased the dot and said, “Hey Śaśimukhi! That musk dot looked very charming on Your chin. However, when it saw its dark friend approaching it jumped to safety within the fortress of My teeth out of fear of You.” Kundalatā said to Rādhā, “As a skilled poet, You have composed verses in the bindu-cyutaka meter (causing the dot to fall). Your rival Kṛṣṇa, the king of poets, however, has become angry with You and written His own poem in the bindvāgama meter (to recover the dot). Thus as the musk dot kissed Your face, Kṛṣṇa kissed You. Rādhe! Cultured people love to watch an artist display his talents. Therefore, You can decorate Kṛṣṇa with a garland of jewels (Your teeth).” Rādhā replied, “O Kundalatā! Since You are blooming with affection over your cousin’s illustrious qualities, why don’t you worship His sun-like lips with the white kunda flowers of your teeth?” Kundalatā feigned anger as she addressed Acyuta, “Hari! Since Rādhā is Mukharā’s pretty granddaughter, She is also mukharā (very talkative) and Lalitā is prakharā (contrary and hot tempered). You are timid and soft spoken, so how will You retrieve Your flute? You are a single gentle-hearted person against a host of devious domineering girls. You had better run away to the cow pastures before the clever gopīs steal Your clothes and ornaments too! “Aha! The gopīs are greedy for paramours; therefore, they cannot distinguish between sin and virtue. They think I am just like them. My cousin Kṛṣṇa is a mere boy and I am a chaste wife of pure behavior. Let us stop talking with these proud gopīs who only slander our reputation. Oh Kṛṣṇaji! Reward Viśākhā as You promised. You can leave me out of the conflict because I am going home.” Kṛṣṇa accepted Kundalatā’s advice and smilingly addressed Viśākhā, “O chaste one, come and take your jewels!” As Kṛṣṇa embraced Viśākhā, the sakhīs encircled them and laughed loudly. Kṛṣṇa argued with the sakhīs and a great tumult arose. Rādhā took advantage of the commotion, stifled Her ornaments and slipped away unnoticed to carefully hide in a bower. Tulasī felt apprehensive so she clutched the flute and fled to a nearby bower to meet Vṛndā. Vṛndā took the flute, pressed it to her breasts and said, “My dear flute, you are the crown of your entire family (vaṁśa)! Even though you took birth in a family of insignificant bamboos (vaṁśa), you have instigated a remarkable pastime for the pleasure of Rādhā-Mādhava.” Viśākhā was slightly disturbed over the sakhīs’ laughing. Moving her eyes restlessly, she cursed Kṛṣṇa with a choked voice. Viśākhā struggled awhile and then broke free from Kṛṣṇa’s tight grip. Viśākhā rebuked Kṛṣṇa, “We are neither Your family members, nor are we Your servants. How can it

/Q: be proper for us to take gifts (embraces) from You, a stranger? O king of cheaters! I think You should give Your gifts to Your cousin Kundalatā, a family member, since she helped You find the flute.” Viśākhā addressed Kundalatā, “O sakhī! You are usually very bold. Why have you suddenly become bewildered? Why have you neglected your cousin’s gifts and given them to others? Stop trying to pollute us and just accept His charity.” Kundalatā replied, “The generous donor has freely given charity to you women with excellent teeth (dvija: teeth or exalted brāhmaṇīs) just to increase His piety. Why should I stop Him and commit sin? Why are you afraid of Kṛṣṇa’s gift of love? You should accept it and repay Him double the amount.” Citrā said, “O Viśākhā! It is your reward for all your hard work. Why reject it as someone else’s? You will become rich! If you have no use for the wealth, then give it to Kundalatā standing right beside you.” Kundalatā replied, “O Citrā! Kṛṣṇa is freely distributing His own jewels. If You do not accept, what loss is there for Him? Kṛṣṇa’s wealth will remain with Him.” Kundalatā said to Kṛṣṇa, “Being generous, You are offering charity to these girls, even though they are too small-minded to appreciate it. You should offer the gift to the liberal Rādhārāṇī, for only She is wise enough to perceive its value.” Kṛṣṇa’s restless eyes anxiously searched for Rādhā. Not finding Her, Kṛṣṇa said, “O crooked Lalitā! Where have you hidden your thieving friend Rādhā? Bring Her to Me or else you will suffer the consequences.” Lalitā said, “I am not a witness and I do not know Rādhā’s whereabouts. Find Her by Your own efforts and rule Your little kingdom with Rādhā as Your queen. I am going home!” One sakhī said, “Rādhā went home.” Another said, “Rādhā went to perform Sūrya-pūjā.” One other sakhī said, “Kiśorī went to bathe in Manasa Gaṅgā after becoming impure from Your touch.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 10.31-143
-L: Kṛṣṇa enters Rādhā’s bower
/Q: As the sakhīs continued joking, Kṛṣṇa glanced at Kundalatā’s face. Kṛṣṇa followed her eye signals and happily found Rādhā hiding in a nearby nikuñja. After Kṛṣṇa entered the nikuñja, Kundalatā and her friends closed its four gates of intertwining vines and waited outside in the courtyard. Rādhikā tried to escape but Kṛṣṇa caught Her before She reached the door and forcibly carried Her to the flowerbed. Just as an intoxicated elephant plunges into a cooling river to get relief from a blazing fire, the mad elephant Kṛṣṇa, scorched by the forest-fire of amorous passion, relieved Himself by plunging into the Rādhā sura-taraṅgini (waves of celestial Gaṅgā, or waves of divinely erotic sports). Govinda-līlāmṛta 10.144-147 Rādhā repeatedly tried to conceal Her actual feelings. The feelings however, forcefully revealed themselves to proclaim the great love Rādhā bore in Her heart for Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā’s frown disapproved, however, Her slight smile showed approval. Rādhikā’s words of “No! No!” spoken with joyful desire, actually gave Her consent. Rādhā defended Herself with Her hands, but with weak resistance because Her hands were trembling with the bliss of love and Her body hair was standing erect. Rādhā’s crying showed Her distress, but Her tears were dry revealing Her bliss. Rādhikā bit Kṛṣṇa with Her teeth and scratched Him with Her nails, as if Kṛṣṇa were Her enemy. Rādhā’s

/Q: expertise in amorous affairs gave Kṛṣṇa insatiable joy. Vidagdha-mādhava 7.38-39 Kṛṣṇa held Rādhikā firmly to His chest and carried Her to the nikuñja bed. Radhika swung Her thighs, feet and neck out in opposition while protesting, “No! No! No!” It looked like a streak of lightning dancing with a raincloud, or that Cupid was twanging his bow of campaka flowers. Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 9.64 Radhika’s bracelets jingled loudly as Her hands moved to prevent Kṛṣṇa from opening Her bodice and undergarments. Kṛṣṇa, trembling with amorous passion, stuttered as He demanded, “Gi-gi-give Me the flute!” Rādhikā joyfully stuttered in reply, “I do do not have Your flute!” Kṛṣṇa eagerly stole the jewels of Rādhā’s youth and She anxiously tried to prevent Him. At last, Kandarpa’s (Cupid) general named boldness routed Rādhikā’s sakhīs of resistance, shyness and patience. As the fury of Rādhā-Mādhava’s beautiful, divine love festival intensified, a stream of nectar appeared as Rādhā’s impassioned sighs resembling a cuckoo’s sweet warbling. Love bites and scratches arose on Their splendid bodies as They playfully scuffled. May Rādhā-Mādhava’s sweet pastimes in the solitary kuñja be forever glorified! Govinda-līlāmṛta 10.147-149 As Rādhā-Mādhava concluded Their amorous pastimes, the gopīs anxiously gathered outside the door of the kuñja. They peeked through the interstices in the bower house wall to admire the beauty of the loving couple. Rādhā urged Kṛṣṇa to redress Her. When He started, however, Rādhā resisted. Kṛṣṇa ignored Her and finished the dressing. Afterwards, Rādhā ornamented Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā felt shy and reluctant to appear before Her sakhīs. Kṛṣṇa, His eyes blossoming with happiness, grabbed Rādhā’s hand and forcibly dragged Her outside into the courtyard like a convicted thief. The gleeful sakhīs surrounded their priyā-sakhī, who was squinting Her eyes bashfully. Keśava’s eyes bloomed with bliss. The sakhīs attentively asked Rādhā, “O sakhī! Where did You go after leaving us? We searched everywhere but could not find You. Where did You meet this arrogant fellow?” Admiring the love marks on Rādhā’s limbs, the sakhīs added, “Luckily, You were not defeated by Him (in Cupid’s battle)!” The sakhīs’ crooked joking words filled Rādhā with embarrassment. Infuriated with Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā started to walk away. She knitted Her eyebrows, and pointed Her thumb and index finger at Kṛṣṇa while chastising Him with an angry faltering voice. Rādhā turned toward Her snickering friends and cleverly said, “O sakhīs! You held My cloth and pulled Me back when I tried to go home. When I hid from Kṛṣṇa, you tortured Me by sending Kṛṣṇa to Me. Therefore, how can I stay in your association? I fearfully hid in this kuñja when the intoxicated snake, thirsting to touch Me, hotly pursued Me. Fortunately, the red and white lotus flowers and the thorny vines acted as friends to protect Me.” Kundalatā said, “O Rādhā! You are surely telling the truth. We can clearly see on Kṛṣṇa’s body the signs of Your strenuous resistance to His advances. It is befitting that Your vine-friends have torn apart Kṛṣṇa’s body with their sharp, thorn-like nails! Although they are Your protectors, it is astonishing that they have torn up Your body even more! “Furthermore, since lusty Kṛṣṇa always has affairs with the beautiful gopīs, it is not surprising that His chest bears many moonlike (Candrāvalī) scratches on it. Rādhā, we know that You envy Candrāvalī, so why are the same marks adorning Your chest too? This is most perplexing.” Lalitā defended Rādhā, saying, “O chaste Kundalatā! Why would the thorny twigs and branches fail to

/Q: mar a chaste woman fleeing in fear of a whimsical debauchee?” The sakhīs perceived that Kṛṣṇa wanted to hear the glories of Rādhā’s gorgeous limbs and relish the exotic beauty of Her conflicting emotions. In order to please Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs decided to mix the rasālā (nectarean beverage) of their poetic words with the camphor of Rādhā’s sweet form. Rādhā, however, forbade them with a sharp glance. Govinda in turn encouraged the gopīs by sprinkling them with the honey sweet smile of His blossoming lotus face. The gopīs giggled slightly as they started describing the matchless beauty of restless-eyed Rādhikā.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.4-20
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (12:00 p.m.—12:24 p.m.)
-L: Description of Rādhā
/Q: Viśākhā, Her face blossoming with a beautiful teeth-revealing smile, initiated the glorification of Rādhikā for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. Viśākhā said, “Have Rādhā’s breasts, like two Śiva liṅgas, given up the spotted waning moon and decorated themselves with the many phases of the spotless full moon of Kṛṣṇa’s fingernails?” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.25 Kāñcanalatā, ignoring Rādhā’s menacing glance and accepting the approval of Kṛṣṇa’s eyebrows, clearly described Rādhārāṇī: “Just see the fascinating beauty of Rādhā’s deep navel, Her romāvalī (fine line of hair extending from navel to chest), Her breasts and Her moonlike face. Seeing them, people think that the Creator has erred because rising from that lake of condensed nectar (navel) is one stem (romāvalī) which has sprouted two golden lotus flowers (breasts) that are always closed because of the brilliant shining of the moon (Rādhikā’s face).” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.43 Doe-eyed Mādhavī said, “Rādhā’s body is the yajña-śālā (sacrificial arena) for fulfilling all of Kṛṣṇa’s desires. Her deep navel is the homa-kuṇḍa (sacrificial fire pit). Her tribali (three folds of skin on Rādhā’s belly) is the mekhalā (three ropes tied around the pit). Her romāvalī is the sacrificial ladle. Her breasts are two auspicious golden pots. Her neck is the pūjā conch. Her niṭamba (hips) are the sacrificial seat and Cupid himself is the priest for the sacrifice.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.45 A sakhī named Vasantī glanced at the jewel-like Vṛṣabhānunandinī and said, “I think Rādhārāṇī’s body is Kandarpa’s (Cupid) arsenal. Kiśorī’s long tapered eyebrows are his bows, Her romāvalī— his sword, Her crooked glances—his arrows, Her arms—his noose, Her neck—his conch, Her attractive hips—his disc weapon, Her radiant cheeks—his golden shield and Rādhā’s beautiful fingernails are Cupid’s goad.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.47 Vṛndā-devī, inspired by Vasantī’s description, said, “Rādhikā’s beautiful form is a nectarean celestial Gaṅgā sporting ground for the elephant of Kṛṣṇa’s heart. Her arms are two lotus stems. Rādhā’s beautiful breasts are two cakravāka birds. Her splendid face, navel, hands and feet are assorted lotuses growing in the water. Kiśorī’s curling locks resemble a swarm of bees. Her charming smile is a water lily. Rādhā’s eyes are blue lotuses and Her romāvalī is the moss floating on the water.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.49 Dhaniṣṭhā said, “‘The black musk dot on Rādhā’s chin defies the beauty of a bumblebee sitting on a golden lotus petal basking in the morning sun, or a black cuckoo resting in the window of a golden temple.’ I overheard Śyāma say this when He raised Rādhā’s chin with His fingers to kiss Her.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.77 Lalitā said, “Rādhā’s body is an emporium of celestial scents. All Her limbs are fragrant with

/Q: kuṅkuma. Rādhā’s hair, eyes, eyebrows and navel emanate the aroma of a blue lotus mixed with musk and aguru. Rādhā’s face, ears, nose, breasts, hands and feet disperse the fragrance of lotuses anointed with camphor. Her hips, nails and armpits emit the fragrance of a ketakī flower anointed with sandalwood paste.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1. 17 Another sakhī asked Rādhā, “O lotus-eyed one! Who has used His fingernails to draw a picture of Himself on the upper portion of Your left breast? That picture does not fade nor can it be removed. Are You not proud to carry that picture?” Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.129 One sakhī said, “Like the rays of dawn rising from the darkness or a red lotus blooming in the Yamunā, the red lac stains from Rādhā’s lotus feet, impressed on Kṛṣṇa’s chest, completely eclipse the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha, Śrīvatsa and the golden line of Lakṣmi. May these wonderful marks protect us always.” Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 8.12 Kṛṣṇa became intensely thirsty from drinking the nectarean words of the sakhīs, churned from the ocean of prema. The Vraja-gopīs became intoxicated with bliss by drinking the honey sweet jokes streaming from Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 10.80
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (12:24 p.m.—1:12 p.m.)
-L: Service of the six seasons
/Q: Vṛndā said, “O King and Queen of Vraja’s forests! O Rādhā-Govinda! You and the sakhīs should listen to the directors of the six seasons who wish to make a request at Your lotus feet.” The six seasons prayed, “O Rādhā-Govinda! We have carefully labored with all our energy and skill to make the Vṛndāvana forest wonderfully beautiful for Your pleasure. O king and queen of Vṛndāvana! Now just have a look at our work and make our efforts fruitful!” Govinda-līlāmṛta 12.1- 2 Kṛṣṇa left the bower along with the sakhīs. The bees of Rādhā’s eyes indulged in the honey of Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness. When they beheld the splendor of the seasons, it seemed that millions of Cupids, conquered by Kṛṣṇa’s unparrelled beauty, were worshiping a particle of the luster of Kṛṣṇa’s toenails. Kṛṣṇa looked lovingly upon Rādhikā and tenderly placed His left arm on Her shoulder, making Her shiver with ecstasy. The beauty of the scene, although beyond description, can be imperfectly compared to a golden lotus flower shaking in the high waves of an ocean of sweetness. Two sakhīs stood on either side of the Divine Couple offering betel nuts to Them. Rādhā held it in the fingers of Her left hand and put it in Kṛṣṇa’s mouth. Kṛṣṇa took it in His right hand and offered it to Rādhā’s mouth. While resting His left arm on Kiśorī’s shoulder, Kṛṣṇa tried to touch Her bosom, but She slapped Him with Her left hand. It appeared that a red lotus flower was trying to relish a cakravāka bird swimming in a pond of natural beauty, but a red water lily prevented it. Rādhā-Mādhava walked along a shady path flanked by tall green trees. The occasional touch of the sun’s rays filtering through the leaves made Rādhā’s lovely face perspire. Kṛṣṇa then tilted His crown to shade Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 1.1-5 Vṛndā, the maintainer of the forest, waved her hand to say something, but the sound of a flute was heard. By chance, a sudden gust of wind produced the sound by entering the flute Vṛndā was trying to conceal. Kundalatā and the surprised sakhīs found Kṛṣṇa’s flute hidden on Vṛndā. Kundalatā took the flute from her exclaiming, “Oh, Vṛndā is the thief!” and handed it to Kṛṣṇa.

/Q: Rādhā said, “O Kundalatā! Just see how your cousin Kṛṣṇa unduly harassed Us after hiding His flute on Vṛndā. If you do not believe Me, just ask Vṛndā who gave her the flute. If she does not tell the truth, certainly she should be punished.” Vṛndā vouched, “The old she-monkey Kakkhaṭī forcefully snatched the flute from Śaibyā’s hand and gave it to me when I was hiding in the kuñja with Nāndīmukhī.” Kundalatā returned the flute to Kṛṣṇa. He was so happy to get it back after such a long time that He immediately played it. The attractive sound of Govinda’s flute drowned the three worlds in a nectar shower of bliss and aroused erotic desires within the minds of all women. A righteous woman’s chastity may be compared to bamboo, but Kṛṣṇa’s bamboo flute acts like a ghuna insect to chew her chastity to powder. Kṛṣṇa’s flute song causes all stationary objects to wriggle in ecstasy and moving objects to become motionless. The six seasons manifest simultaneously in Vṛndāvana by the influence of Śyāma’s flute. Kṛṣṇa’s flute song, piercing like Cupid’s arrows, makes even the most patient of chaste women frenzied with amorous desires. Thus, they cast their patience far away! What to speak of women, even men become violently afflicted with passion. It is not so astonishing, since Kṛṣṇa Himself is the transcendental Cupid! Kṛṣṇa’s flute song makes objects adopt opposite qualities. Mountains melt and flow in all directions. Seeing the streams of molten rock, the birds and deer rush to drink the nectar. When they hear the flute, they become stunned in their tracks and cannot drink. The water in the lakes turns solid when the sound of the flute passes over it. As a result, the female swans get their feet locked in the stone-like water. The feet of the male swans also get locked in the petrified water. Thus, they cannot eat the lotus stems, feed them to their partners or enjoy with them.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 12.34-42
-L: Beauty of Vṛndāvana
/Q: Vṛndā walked before Rādhā-Mādhava pointing out the spectacular grandeur of the six seasonal forests of Vṛndāvana. Vṛndā said, “O Rādhā-Mādhava! See the glories of the forest! The forest has become overwhelmed in unrestrained euphoric love by hearing Kṛṣṇa’s flute. It is exhibiting sāttvika-bhāvas just like the sakhīs. As the gopīs become stunned, the forest appears stunned too when its mobile creatures stop moving. The forest trembles when its immobile objects move. It perspires through its melted rocks, its voice chokes up with the unclear bird calls and its hair stands upright in rapture as the sudden appearance of sprouts. In the spring, the forest dresses and decorates herself with fragrant flowers such as mādhavī and bakula; in the summer with jasmine, amogha and acacia; in the monsoon season with yūthika, kadamba and ketakī; in the autumn with jāti, lotus and vāṇa; in the winter with lodhra and globe amaranth, and in the dewy season with bandhūka and kunda which we use to ornament Your bodies. “The forest assumes mithunī-bhāvaḥ (the erotic mood) to worship You by arousing Your desires for conjugal love. Just see how the mādhavī creepers bloom on the mango trees, the jasmine creepers wrap around the śirīṣa trees, the yūthika creepers embrace the kadamba trees, the jāti creepers cling to the sapta-parṇa trees, the amlāna creepers tightly hold the lodhra trees and the priyaṅgu creepers clutch the kunda trees. “All of Vṛndāvana’s birds are blissfully eulogizing Your transcendental attributes by warbling

/Q: affectionately. The bees sing with the cuckoos, the shrikes with the blue jays, the peacocks and cātaka birds with the gallulines, the swans with the herons, the parrots with the golden cātakas and the pigeons with the skylarks.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 12.43-47 “In some places the earth is made of emeralds with golden trees, shrubs and creepers. In some places the roads are gold and the trees and creepers are made of emeralds. Some places abound in crystal trees, bushes and creepers standing on earth made of rubies. While other areas have earth made of crystal and trees and shrubs composed of rubies. Some spots have emerald trees embraced by golden creepers and in other spots emerald creepers embrace golden trees. In other parts, crystal trees embrace ruby creepers, while in other places ruby trees embrace crystal creepers. “In Vṛndāvana there are no jewel trees without jewel branches and no jewel branches without jewel buds. There are no jewel buds without jewel flowers and there are no jewel flowers without attractive scent. There are water basins surrounding the bases of the trees. The basins are filled with flowing streams appearing like piles of liquid jewels arising from jewel mountains. Jewel birds ornament the jeweled basins. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1. 17-120 “The trunks of the trees appear to be covered in red lac due to the light rays reflecting off the ruby bejeweled water basins. It seems their liquid attraction (rasa) for Kṛṣṇa is rising up from their roots due to the limited space within their hearts. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.23 “The bathing places on the river are furnished with bowers. Four straight, tall and stout trees, with leafy branches hanging down to make natural canopies, form the corners of the forest cottages. Two creepers wind around each of the trees to appear like a pair of embracing lovers. The creepers, entangled with their flowers, leaves and fruits, make a marvelous sight. Flowering creepers entwine to comprise the walls of the pastime cottage. The branches of the creepers assemble themselves artistically to form the cottage doors. Varieties of colorful flowers hang down to make the interior ceiling and dangling flowering creepers move in the breeze as natural cāmara whisks.” Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 1.42-43 The Divine Couple rewarded Vṛndā with two priceless necklaces for showing Them the matchless beauty of Vṛndāvana. Rādhā-Mādhava then happily praised Vṛndāvana.
-L: Service of the creepers
/Q: In order to worship Kṛṣṇa, the creepers offered their buds as arghya (respectful offering to the head or hands); their sap as pādya (foot wash); their pollen as body ointment; their flowers and new leaves as ornaments; their fruits as naivedya (food offering); their branches moving in the wind as euphoric dancing and the buzzing of intoxicated bees as songs of praise. One creeper protected her flower cluster breasts with the hand of her leaves while frowning at Kṛṣṇa with a swarm of bees. With her other hand of leaves she prevented Kṛṣṇa’s embrace by waving in the wind to stop Him. When Madhusūdana came nearby, the creepers expressed fright by shaking their hand-like leaves. They displayed enthusiasm by laughing in the form of their brightly blooming white flowers. They conveyed anger with the buzzing bees of their glances. Kṛṣṇa eagerly picked many multi-colored flowers to decorate Priyaji. Śyāma carefully placed red bandhuka flowers above the part in Rādhā’s hair as a mark of vermilion. Kṛṣṇa decorated Rādhā’s cheeks with makarī (female dolphins) designs by cutting colored petals with His fingernails. Śyāma crafted a natural bodice from flowers and leaves to cover Kiśorī’s firm breasts. Śyāma expressed His

/Q: unlimited affection for Rādhikā by serving Her. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.26-29 After adorning Rādhā with flowers, Śyāma said, “Oh Priyaji! Your face is so beautiful! Indeed, You are the reigning goddess of the bowers and very much attracted to the dark moon! Alaṅkāra- kaustubha 5.63 “O Rādhā! Is Your gorgeous face the full moon or a blooming lotus? Are Your restless eyes khañjana birds or cakorīs? Is Your splendid body a golden creeper or the autumn moonlight? Is Your creator Cupid or madhura-rasa? Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 8.36 “O Rādhā! Your youthful body emanates the luster of a dazzling desire tree. The regal tree of Your body bends down from the weight of its flower clusters in the form of Your full breasts; its two branches sway attractively in the breeze as Your two golden arms; it disperses a delightful flower fragrance in the form of Your smile and its pinkish leaf buds, the color of dawn, are Your delicate hands. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 8.39 “O Rādhā! If the moon was spotless, always full and untouched by the cakora bird, then it could serve Your face. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 8.73 “O Rādhā, one with the most beautiful face! Your eyes are reddish and naturally fickle. Your smile is gentle and alluring. Your sweet speech is both delicate and crooked. Your splendid body, moving so attractively along the path, is naturally desirous of being embraced. Who can aptly characterize Your rapture, Your passion and Your intoxication? Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 8.171 “O My sakhī Rādhikā! You alone are the desire creeper of love (prema kalpa-latā) with the beautiful flower cluster of Your breasts, the blossoming flower of Your smile, the sap of Your sweet words, the two khañjana birds of Your eyes, the buzzing bees of Your eye brows hovering over the creeper, and the fresh leaf buds of Your delicate hands and feet.”
/R: Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.70
-L: Rādhā’s pretense of anger
/Q: Somehow, Rādhā became angry while listening to Śyāma’s description. Rādhā mistook the reflection of Kṛṣṇa’s ruby earrings on His cheeks as traces of lipstick from another gopī. Rādhā pierced Kṛṣṇa with an angry glance from the reddened corners of Her moistened eyes. Rādhā was not sure that Kṛṣṇa had perceived Her anger, so She lowered Her head to show false indignation. Alaṅkāra- kaustubha 5.194 “O dearest! Will Your face be as attractive when You are pleased as when You are displeased? May the creator always make You angry!” Rādhā and the sakhīs laughed upon hearing Kṛṣṇa’s witty words. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 4.3 Kiśorī immediately lowered Her head when Kṛṣṇa glanced at Her. Kṛṣṇa then turned toward the sakhīs, and Kiśorī peeked at Śyāma with trembling, damp red eyes. When Kṛṣṇa looked back at Rādhikā, She tried to hide Her soft laughter as the hair on Her body stood erect in ecstasy. Kṛṣṇa quickly embraced Rādhā and She gave up Her obstinacy. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.195 Rādhā freed Herself from Śyāma and walked a short distance away. Seeing a bee before Her, Rādhā turned around and said, “O Aghāri (Kṛṣṇa: destroyer of Agha)! Even though I repeatedly brush him aside with My hand, this pesky bee keeps trying to land on My face. I bow down to Your feet and beg You to mercifully drive away the wicked bee! Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 13.14 “The ferocious bee loudly buzzes around repeatedly diving for My campaka earrings. Protect Me,

/Q: protect Me!” Terrified of the bee, doe-eyed Rādhā embraced Kṛṣṇa. Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.68 Rādhā’s golden effulgence turned Kṛṣṇa’s bluish complexion emerald, and His bluish complexion turned Her golden complexion green. Rādhā-Mādhava maintained Their individual colors in separation, however, in union They became the same color. Rādhā rested Her arm on Śyāma’s shoulder as She walked languidly down the path. Their hips occasionally bumped against each other like waves meeting in the ocean. Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahā-kāvyaṁ 9.19 The youthful damsels of Vraja were somewhat inconvenienced by their broad hips and heavy breasts which made them walk slowly. However, they were happy knowing that they were very pleasing to Cupid. The gopīs’ golden waistbells jingled like Cupid’s drum. Their hips swayed attractively in wave-like motions as they walked along in a graceful dancing manner. The gopīs’ anklets seemed to weep an affectionate message: “O sakhī! My tender lotus feet cannot walk so fast. O Kṛṣṇa, with beautiful eyes like the madira flower, please be kind!” When the red lac from the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa’s beloved gopīs fell off to color the forest floor, it seemed to reveal the earth’s attraction for Kṛṣṇa as well.
/R: Caitanya-caritāmṛta-mahā-kāvyaṁ 9.13- 16
-L: The Spring Forest
/Q: Vṛndā brought Rādhā-Mādhava to the spring forest and said, “Behold the Vasanta Kānta forest where spring, the king of all seasons, eagerly and joyfully awaits to serve You with various opulences to stimulate Your love. Govinda-līlāmrta 12.68 “The bees hum attractively, flitting from flower to flower in the spring bowers. The playful cuckoos perched in the trees create a soothing atmosphere with their murmuring. The prolific creepers sway lazily in the gentle Malayan breeze.” Kṛṣnāhnika-kaumudī 3.58 Kṛṣṇa was awestruck by the abundant natural splendor of the Vṛndāvana forest, which had increased by His ambrosial glance. Śyāma then happily described it to His gorgeous sweetheart: Govinda- līlāmrta 12.69 “Spring personified looks very attractive with her beautiful punnāga flower earrings, mādhavī creeper choker, bakula flower necklaces, red palāśa flower bindu, campaka flower bodice and red aśoka flower lower cloth. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.35 “O Kunda-danti (white teeth as beautiful as jasmine flowers; Rādhā)! Look at the bumblebees! After extracting all the nectar from the kunda flowers, they loudly hum out of greed for more as they fly to the top branch of the mango tree. “O Kalakaṇṭhi (sweet-voiced Rādhā!) It is well known that nibbling on mango buds sweetens the cuckoo’s voice. The bees are headed there in order to purify their voices with the bitter juice of new mango buds along with the cuckoos, as if abandoning their vow of silence. “Look at the flowering mādhavī and golden yūthikā creepers embracing the blooming campaka trees and the navamālika creepers embracing the bakula trees. See the lines of splendid tamāla, punnāga, tilaka and mango trees exhibiting their brilliant beauty before You. “O look here Vidhumukhi (moon-faced lady)! There are punnāga trees with navamālikā creepers, bakula trees with clove creepers, kovidāra trees with kubjā creepers, campaka trees with ketakī creepers, aśoka trees with golden yūthikā creepers, kiṁśuka trees with pāṭalī creepers, mango trees

/Q: with mādhavī creepers and nāgakeśara trees with śatapatrikā creepers. “Carpenters come here to cut the atimukta trees [wood suitable for making chariots], garland makers collect the flowers of the atimukta creepers [second name for mādhavī], and those aspiring for personal liberation come to associate with the Vrajavāsīs here who have already surpassed the liberated stage [atimuktas]. The forest is Cupid’s arrow-factory. The trees and creepers are the workers manufacturing the flower-arrows. The bumblebees are the quality control experts traveling from flower to flower. On the pretext of making loud buzzing sounds, the bees announce the good and ill of each worker’s product.” Kṛṣṇa continued to joke with His beloved Rādhā, saying, “Just see the honeybee couple has entered a flower to make love. Seeing her own form reflected on the soft petals of the flower, the love thirsty female bee mistakenly thinks another female bee is embracing her lover. Burning with jealous anger, she adamantly refuses to drink the nectar of that flower and immediately flies away. Govinda- līlāmrta 12.70-76 “Rādhā! Here, Cupid is the king. The sweet spring is his minister and the Malaya breeze is his invincible general. The bees are his spies and the flocks of cuckoos are his chastisers. The uncooperative Vraja-gopīs are punishable and the mountain caves are the prisons. Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 13.19 “The cuckoos, truly the embodiments of primordial sound, relish the mango buds and open their beaks to coo melodiously. The bees intoxicated by the mango nectar leave the buds at this time and take rest. The best of maddened elephants, like Cupid personified, roams about with the intoxicated gopīs of Vraja, whose sweet whispering defeats the soothing sound of running water. The cuckoos murmur in all directions like a bell to announce their arrival.” Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.33-34 The sakhīs, as if not being able to tolerate Kṛṣṇa’s statements, recited different metaphors. One sakhī said, “All the creepers, being excited with joy by Kṛṣṇa’s glance, are dancing passionately moving their hands according to their dance instructor, the gentle Malaya wind and the accompanying songs of the bees.” Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.31 Another sakhī said, “When Kṛṣṇa approaches that creeper covered with buds to take its flowers, she quivers in fear by shaking her leaf-like hands. However, she simultaneously shows eagerness by smiling sweetly with her flowers. Then again she diplays anger with her crooked glances in the form of lines of bees.” Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.28 One sakhī said, “One creeper, seeing Hari advancing, covered her flower cluster breasts with her left hand made of leaves fluttering in the wind. Using other leaves as a right hand, she signaled “No, no, no, no,” while frowning in the form of a swarm of bees. Calling a friend to come to help with one leaf hand, the creeper became embarrassed and revealed a gentle smile in the form of flowers.” Alaṅkāra- kaustubha 5.27 Rādhā became tired from rambling through the springtime forest, so She sat beneath a tree to rest with Śyāma and Her friends. Rādhā designed some flower ornaments and decorated Kṛṣṇa with them. Kṛṣṇa in turn adorned Rādhā, but out of shyness, She would not sit near Kṛṣṇa. Vṛndā felt very joyful as she personally beautified Rādhikā with the flower ornaments. Vṛndā set white lilies in Rādhikā’s hair and placed a bakula mālā across Her hairline that seemed to kiss Rādhā’s forehead. Vṛndā adorned Rādhā’s hair part with deftly placed red aśoka flowers. She hung

/Q: mango pericarps over Her ears and draped a vāsantī garland over Her breasts. Ānanda-vṛndāvana- campū 14.14 Vṛndā and the vanadevīs dressed all the sakhīs attending Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with ornaments and clothing suitable for the spring festival.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.13
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (1:12 p.m.—1:36 p.m.)
-L: Spring festival of Holī
/Q: Vṛndā said, “O Rādhā-Mādhava! You are Vṛndāvana’s treasury of auspiciousness! We are approaching the Northwestern corner of Lalitā’s kuñja, wherein a colorful stage is set for Your Holi festival (throwing colored powders and liquids). Pictures made from musk and aguru beautified the stage floor. “All the paraphernalia for playing Holī is ready there, including wide-mouthed golden pots filled with aguru, kuṅkuma, saffron, sandalwood and musk mixed in water and numerous jeweled pichkaris (syringes) for squirting these pleasing substances. There are flower bows and arrows and bombs made of flowers, powdered camphor, kuṅkuma and other ingredients. There are some special bombs made from powdered musk, camphor, vermilion and aguru wrapped in flower petals and coated with lac. They are so delicate that they break open just by breathing on them. When thrown, the flower bombs burst in mid air to cover one’s opponent from the sky. There are also golden platters filled with delicious betelnuts, garlands, flower-scented drinking water, sandalwood paste and other enjoyable things.” Govinda-līlāmrta 14.27-30 How did such unlimited articles appear? Vṛndāvana’s desire trees provided all the perfumed powders, colored liquids, unguents, lac flower bombs and the weapons like pichkaris, flower bows and arrows. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.17 Śyāma ascended the sporting stage with the lovely young damsels of Vraja. They divided themselves into two groups. Picking up the squirting syringes, colored powders and other fragrant substances, they commenced the battle of Holī in a loving spirit. Govinda-līlāmrta 14.31 Some sakhīs playfully hid sachets of flower pollen in their glistening golden waist-belts. The bags of pollen seemed like the accumulated wealth of their skill in the arts of love, collected over a long period, for purchasing the jewel of Kṛṣṇa’s mind. Other sakhīs held jeweled trays containing delicate flasks made of lac filled with aguru, musk, camphor and sandalwood. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 22.14-15 Kṛṣṇa broke off a fresh mango bud and playfully hung it over one of His ears, which were slightly elongated from the weight of His elegant jeweled earrings. The swaying of Kṛṣṇa’s enchanting earrings cast exotic reflections on His cheeks. He put a garland of mādhavī flowers around His neck and under His beautiful, bouncing curly locks. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.24 Fine powders as red as the sun clouded the whole sky. As they gradually descended, they colored and scented Kṛṣṇa’s turban, hair, eyelids and tilaka. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.28 Kṛṣṇa vanquished the young gopīs’ long-standing pride of their singing skill by vibrating sweet indistinct notes on His flute. The gopīs responded by surrounding Kṛṣṇa and blissfully bombarding Him with saffron powder while their bangles jingled. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 21.10 Kṛṣṇa’s friends headed by Subala sang songs in vasanta-rāga while others played musical

/Q: instruments. Some boys threw flower bombs and scented powder at each other. Fun-loving Madhumaṅgala performed an ecstatic dance full of mirth. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.154 The Vraja-gopīs laughed and giggled as they threw powdered vermilion and saffron on each other. Feeling great abandon, they continually sang songs in the dvipadikā meter to the accompaniment of stringed instruments. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 21.9 Some gopīs held ingeniously designed golden syringes of various shapes filled with flower essences, saffron water, sandalwood water and musk water. The gopīs looked like heavily armed soldiers ready for the battle of love. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 22.15 Kṛṣṇa sang a sweet song in the carcarī rhythm with great artistry. His voice surpassed the sound of the vīṇā. The Yamunā froze in her course and stopped flowing, the trees and creepers dripped tears and the birds and animals trembled in ecstasy. The does felt blissful upon hearing Śyāma’s flute melody. They reacted by licking up the drops of perspiration behind each other’s ears. It seemed that the streams of sweetness from Kṛṣṇa’s song entered the ear holes of the deer and oozed out due to finding insufficient space. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 21.26 Lalitā, emboldened by the sporting mood, gave up all shyness. Lalitā’s eyebrows danced as she enthusiastically sang in a beautiful voice an ālāpa in kedara-rāga, filled with gamakas (vocal modulation) and touching the low, middle and high octaves. Her singing defeated the pride of the Gandharvas’ wives. Lalitā displayed her matchless and extensive knowledge of music based on the ancient gāndhāra-grāma (musical scale). Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 21.12 Lalitā’s sweet singing made the bejeweled water basins under the trees melt into liquid, which flowed out and turned solid, forming new jeweled platforms. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 21.16 The gopīs joyfully attacked Kṛṣṇa with thousands of restless sidelong glances. Kṛṣṇa retaliated by shooting the arrow of His love-laden glance, which hit Rādhā’s breast and pierced the armor of Her shyness to release a splendor that radiated in all directions. Rādhā shot back a glance tinged with a smile and mixed with the kālakuṭa poison of Her mascara which cruelly shattered the heart of Hari. Unseen by others, Rādhā raised Her arm, closed Her eyes, furrowed Her brow and playfully fired a vermilion flower bomb at Kṛṣṇa’s chest. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.47-49 Kṛṣṇa showed great skill in battle while attacking the gopīs. He hit them between the breasts with a volley of aśoka flower balls supplied by His friends. The gopīs trembled and the celestial ladies enthusiastically glorified Kṛṣṇa. A fierce battle then broke out between Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs. They threw fragrant red and dark red flower balls and squirted each other with heavenly scented, colored water that felt pleasantly soothing. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.37-38 Kṛṣṇa carried a flower bow and a quiver of flower arrows on His shoulder. His enchanting muralī was tucked in His sash. Śyāma picked up a jeweled syringe, filled it from a pot of fragrant liquid and sprayed the gopīs. The stream of water from Kṛṣṇa’s syringe divided into a hundred and then a thousand streams while traversing the sky. It became a million streams while descending. Upon contacting the gopīs’ bodies, it became ten million streams to totally saturate them. Kṛṣṇa and gopīs threw scented powder at each other that stuck to their wet bodies. They hurled powder-filled lac flasks that burst in mid-air to douse everyone with colors. The particles of saffron and musk sticking to the bodies of the fair-complexioned gopīs appeared like swarms of bees sleeping on golden creepers. The saffron scented drops squirted from Rādhā’s fine-nozzled syringe

/Q: splashed over Kṛṣṇa’s body to look like hundreds of tiny moons reflected upon the deep blue sky. Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs took on a wonderful multi-colored appearance when hit by the pollen powder, camphor, red sindura and aromatic water released from the lac flasks. Initially, the multitudes of colored powders spread throughout the sky and all directions like a huge splendid parasol. The showers of water from the syringes washed the powders from the sky. By this, it seemed that the multi-colored canopy had been cut down. Govinda-līlāmrta 14.37-43 The gopīs combinedly attacked Kṛṣṇa, showering Him with the sharp Cupid arrows of their love- filled glances and the magic mantras of their skillful jokes. These two weapons penetrated Kṛṣṇa’s vital organs and overwhelmed Him with amorous desires. Kṛṣṇa retaliated with the arrows of His restless eyes and gentle smile to wound the sakhīs with romantic longings. Nevertheless, Kṛṣṇa continued to reel from their love arrows. Govinda-līlāmrta 14.47 While Śyāma rested a moment to catch His breath, the clever sakhīs stole His flute, syringe, flower bow and all His flower arrows. One sakhī tried to pilfer Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments, but Rādhā prevented her with a motion of Her attractive eyebrow. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 14.230 Three or four sakhīs simultaneously and forcefully threw lac color flasks, which fell on the earth and cracked open like eggshells releasing baby birds. Scented balls of aguru and sandalwood powder covered all directions. When the sakhīs’ flower bombs came too close to Nandanandana, the sakhīs near Him deflected them. Rādhikā lovingly wiped off the powder from Kṛṣṇa’s handsome dark body with Her soft, perspiration moistened hand whenever any bomb happened to hit Him. Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 22.31-32 Kiśorī deeply relished the sweetness of serving Her beloved hero after the battle. Rādhikā tenderly cleansed the powders and perspiration from Kṛṣṇa’s face with the edge of Her cloth. Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 14.157 Viśākhā and Citrā stood on either side of Rādhā-Mādhava waving cāmaras to remove the perspiration that arose from the ecstasy of seeing each other. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 12.84 As Kṛṣṇa, intoxicated with love, moved about during the Holī festival His ankle bells tinkled sweetly. He thoroughly enjoyed the betel-nut packets offered by Lalitā. Kṛṣṇa’s mind and lotus eyes danced with delight upon seeing the sweet charms of the gopīs’ beautiful bodies partly visible through their fine wet garments. The eyes of the gopīs drank the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s delicious form peeking through His dampened clothes. The sakhīs looked gorgeous with their cheeks slightly puffed from chewing betel nuts, and their foreheads adorned with wet curly locks and beads of perspiration. Flowers fell from their loosened tresses, which swayed over their shoulders and breasts. Govinda-līlāmrta 14.33-34 Everyone beheld a most rare and astonishing sight! A monsoon cloud had descended on earth to assume a human form, and the lightning showered it with rasa. The most amazing sight of all however, was to see a group of glistening lightning flashes repeatedly showering the monsoon cloud with streams of fragrant colored water. The cātakī bird eyes of Vṛndā and others blissfully drank the nectar falling from the cloud. Govinda-līlāmrta 14.48 Rādhā-Govinda ate delicious forest fruits, roots and betel nuts offered by the sakhīs. To please the Divine Couple, their intimate associates redressed Them with skillfully prepared flower belts, earrings, necklaces, crowns and armbands.

-L: Summer forest pastimes
/Q: Madhumaṅgala viewed the summer forest in the distance and exclaimed, “O king and queen of Vraja’s forest! Look at the attractive forest of summer eagerly waiting to serve You with its profuse beauty and different features. The sound of waterfalls and crickets fills the forest. There are many tall, richly foliated trees providing relief from the scorching summer sun. The forest dwellers find solace from the heat of summer by contacting the fresh green grass. The breeze is both cooling and fragrant with pollen from passing over the wave-filled lakes and rivers packed with lotuses and water lilies. “The land in summer is devoid of impurities. The harsh rays of the sun cannot evaporate the moisture from the soft earth on the banks of the deep rivers because they are always green with sprouting grass. The forest is joyfully ornamented with pāṭala flowers for making Your cloths, śirīṣa flowers for Your earrings and jasmine flowers for Your bodily decorations. My heart enjoys seeing the eagerness of the orchards to serve You with their ripe fruits of pilu, karīra, āmalakī, piyāla, jackfruit, bilva, vikaṅkata and tāla. “The trees and creepers, fearing that You might suffer discomfort from walking on the sunstone- studded forest floor heated by the severe sunrays, lovingly shade and fan You with their leaves moving in the breeze. The banana tree with its fruit clusters looks like a mother with seven children. The banana trees caress their offspring with their leaf-like hands and breast-feed them with the honey seeping from their bulbous red flowers. “Hey priyā-sakhā! Just see the cuckoo poking his long beak inside a ripe mango. The sakhīs are giggling because it reminds them of Your kissing Rādhā.” Rādhikā bowed Her head in embarrassment. Baṭu [Madhumaṅgala] continued, “Just see the mallikā creepers embracing the tamāla trees on the shore of the lake. The mallikā’s flowers resemble the smiling face of the tree and the darting honeybees appear like its eyebrows. The tamāla tree, impassioned by Cupid, is dancing in a circle with its many mallikā creepers on the bank of the lake, similar to the way You dance with the gopīs in rasa.” Rādhā-Mukunda smiled over Madhumaṅgala’s sweet words and then decorated Their ears with śirīsā flower clusters offered by Vṛndā. Kṛṣṇa impulsively tossed flower pollen in Rādhikā’s curly locks. Rādhā then showed Her attractive armpit while lifting Her arm to throw pollen on Śyāma’s hair and peacock feather. Kṛṣṇa touched Kiśorī’s breast and joked, “Priyaji! When the heat of summer chased away the coolness, did it take shelter in the stone fortress of Your cooling breasts? Look there! The moonstone troughs under the trees are shedding water upon beholding the moon of Your face. [moonstone, candrakānta gem, melts when moonrays touch it] The birds with their mates are sporting on the edge of the troughs. Govinda-līlāmrta 12.79-91 “O beloved! Look in front of us! There is Govardhana, the king of all mountains, who vanquished Indra, the eternal enemy of all mountains. Meru and other mountains, thinking it improper to show their huge forms in front of the king of kings, have hidden their forms and now worship Govardhana with their respective charms. O Rādhā! The Gaṅgā (Mānasi Gaṅgā) flowing from Govardhana’s golden tablelands makes him look like mount Meru. Govardhana’s caves, glistening with ice, make him look like the Himālayas. Govardhana’s towering peaks desire to block the sun like those of the

/Q: Vindhya Mountain. Govardhana’s silver boulders that form Our thrones make him look like mount Kailāsa. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 13.20-21 “Govardhana Hill offers You pitchers of water through its waterfalls; an umbrella through its trees; a couch of crystal stones; ornaments of various pure and brightly colored minerals and a mirror of its gems. Govardhana, the crest jewel of mountains, thus proclaims his glory. “O gorgeous girl with a slender waist! The peacocks constantly offer feathers for Your ear ornaments on the pretext of dancing. Look there on top of Govardhana! Even now, the peacocks are dancing madly in love. The famous path from Govardhana to the Yamunā is covered with thickets of trees; punnāga trees in the front, campaka behind them, jambu behind them and kadamba all around.” Lalita-mādhava 8.27-29 Kṛṣṇa happily presented Rādhā the flower ornaments He had made. However, She declined to wear them due to Her deep mood of contrariness. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5. 16 Kṛṣṇa tried to break Kiśorī’s sulky mood by saying, “O Devī! You are angry for no reason. On Your request, I personally picked flowers here. Why are You refusing to speak to Me? O Rādhā! My priyā- sakhī! Now I know why Your name is Rādhā (rādh means to destroy or to satisfy). Do not be cunning. Just order Me and I will decorate Your ears with some flowers. Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 15.107 “O Rādhā! If You are angry with Me, why do Your cheeks blush with happiness?” Rādhā could not supress Her smile after hearing Śyāma’s playful words. Kṛṣṇa, the gallant prince of Vraja, then kissed Rādhārāṇī.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 15. 1 Rādhā-Mādhava ambled into the forest named Grīṣma Santoṣavat (satisfaction of summer), decorated with bowers of śirīṣa flowers. Waterfalls streaming down the jewelled peaks of Govardhana kept the entire forest cool and fresh. Huge verdant trees blocked the rays of the sun to shade the Divine Couple and a gentle breeze carried the superb scent of roses. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.59 A cloud with lightning appeared overhead out of affection to form a sapphire umbrella ornamented with gold to keep Rādhā-Govinda from perspiring in the summer heat. The cloud, overwhelmed with its good fortune, changed colors, shed tears of rain and glorified the Divine Couple with a choked voice in the form of thunder. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 1. 1 A charming houseboat sat amidst the lotus flowers in a lake. It was covered with a canopy trimmed with strands of hanging pearls shaking in the wind. The beautiful boat was sprayed by a mist scented with fine particles of camphor and buffeted by the pleasant winds of cāmaras waved by loving attendants. Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa enjoyed resting here on hot afternoons. In the summer, Kṛṣṇa parted His hair and tied it in the back with a thick string of pearls. His shimmering golden dhotī fluttered attractively in the breeze. Kṛṣṇa, decorated with mallikā buds, cooling flower ornaments and sandalwood paste, enjoyed playing in the summer forest. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.38-39 Kṛṣṇa picked flowers to make apparel for Rādhā. All of a sudden, Śyāma saw Kiśorī in the distance and said, “Ah! Rādhā is angry. Therefore, She furrows Her eyebrows at the creepers, which She takes to be Her enemies because its flowers are Cupid’s arrows. Beautiful Rādhārāṇī gaily moves Her lotus feet first in one direction and then another, while gracefully waving Her delicate hand to brush aside the bumblebees attracted by Her sweet fragrance. Rādhikā enjoys Herself just as if She were the lovely goddess of fortune descended to the Vṛndāvana forest.”
/R: Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.57
-L: Entering the monsoon forest

/Q: Subala said, “O Rādhā-Mādhava, just see the magnificent monsoon forest, wherein the peacocks, mistaking You for a lightning flash in a raincloud, open their tail feathers and dance madly, intoxicated with prema. The yūthikā flowers smile proudly as they, with their supremely sweet aroma, allure the restless bees from the laps of the mallikā creepers. The smiling flowers resemble courtesans attracting unfaithful husbands from the laps of their wives with the fragrance of their bodies. The forest shines attractively with swarms of bumblebees. Thick dark blue clouds and rain showers constantly inundate the earth. The yūthikā flower vines bind the playful bees with their sweetness. Govinda-līlāmṛta 12.92-95 “The goddess of the rainy season forest offers a kadamba-mala that brushes Your feet. She also offers chaplets of kūṭaja flowers, ketakī leaf crowns, and ornaments and necklaces crafted from raṅgaṇa, yūthikā and arjuna flowers.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 12.99 Rādhā-Mādhava walked into the Varṣa Praharṣa, the joyful monsoon forest. They marveled at the sight of the thick rain clouds showering water to open the jasmine buds. The clouds, instead of roaring with thunder, rumbled gently as background music for the dancing peacocks. The misty rain and kadamba flowers cooled and scented the wind. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.60 The monsoon season personified exhibited various signs of transcendental joy. The earth smiled sweetly with hosts of blooming mālatī flowers. The forest’s hair stood on end in the form of kadamba flowers and the sky wept tears as cloudbursts of rain. These three spread their affection throughout the joyful monsoon forest. The forehead of the monsoon season had a rainbow for tilaka and golden ketakī flowers ornamenting her dark hair. The spotless garland of bālaka flowers hanging from her neck rested upon the newly formed bulging clouds of her raised breasts. Thus, the goddess of the monsoon season stimulated the mind of Kṛṣṇa. The rumbling of rain clouds echoed throughout the monsoon forest. The cātaka birds heard it and warbled piteously to summon the rain. In response, the rumbling clouds comforted the cātakas by seeming to say, “Do not lament, I will pour showers of rain.” The thundering clouds sounded like a revolving grinding stone powdering a man’s pride. The growl of the clouds resonated like the deep pleasant sound of a mṛḍaṅga, inspiring the peacocks to dance ecstatically. It resembled incantations chanted to revive the life airs of women separated from their lovers. The forest abounded with a symphony of sounds. Everywhere dātyūha birds and flocks of white cranes cried, frogs croaked and peacocks wailed “kekā, kekā.” The clouds rumbled, the raindrops sounded pitter-patter and the water currents murmured “jhapat, jhapat.” These melodious sweet sounds were just suitable for lulling a woman to sleep after enjoying her lover. The nourishing waters of the season beautified the trees and gardens. The plentiful ripened fruits of the mango trees tinted the center of the forest with a golden glow. The ripe jambu fruit trees created a black aura. Beyond the trees was a pale yellow effulgence produced by the sharp, needle-like leaves and flowers of the ketakī tree. With all these colorful hues, the gardens of Vṛndāvana appeared as beautiful as a painting.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.23-27
-L: Swing pastimes
/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava enjoyed the beauty of the forest and soon arrived at a grove of kadamba trees. The trees, which in their highest dark branches had countless yellow kadamba flowers showering streamsof honey, conquered the elegance of clouds embellished by lightning. The extremely long platforms between the kadamba trees appeared to be embankments of Kṛṣṇa’s bliss. The kadamba flowers constantly sprinkled honey upon the platforms and beautiful sleepless bees protected them. At the far edges of each platform stood pairs of tall kadamba trees, whose uppermost branches intertwined forming roofs with emerald pinnacles. Blossoming flowers formed festoons. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 1.12-14 The main swing hung from golden ropes tied to the branches of two tall trees. There were swings in all directions. The embodiments of each direction thought that the swing was only facing itself. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 22.4 The mañjarīs very artistically spread stemless flowers over the swing seats and covered them with fine soft cloth. The swings, with their softness and sweet scent, forcefully attracted Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 1.16 Śyāma sat on the most ornamented swing, which sported a flag. It seemed that bliss personified, served by the goddess of beauty, had mounted the swing. Kṛṣṇa clasped Rādhā’s hand and pulled Her onto the swing to face Him in order to drench everyone in a shower of happiness. It looked like bliss personified was sitting opposite a pond of fully expanded prema. The sakhīs tossed flowers on the Divine Couple for Their satisfaction. They offered ārātrika to Their lotus faces, served pān, garlands and unguents. They also straightened Rādhā’s necklaces and clothing and adjusted Śyāma’s turban whenever needed. Two mañjarīs (prāṇa-sakhīs) tucked their veils in their sashes, and then stepped back and forth to push the swing, bending their bodies as they moved. Two other fortunate sakhīs stood on either side of the swing eagerly placing tasty betel-nut packets into Rādhā-Mādhava’s lotus mouths whenever the swing slowed down. Other virtuous mañjarīs, floating in a river of divine love, attained the pinnacle of bliss by intermittently dousing Rādhā-Govinda with colored flower pollen. The celestial devīs praised their good fortune at beholding the event. The demigoddesses, however, could not directly participate in Kṛṣṇa’s swing pastime because they did not possess the transcendental bhāva or bodies of gopīs. They contributed to Rādhā-Govinda’s happiness by fervently dropping flowers on Them. By serving, they became stunned in ecstasy and forgot all about their shortcomings. The clouds showered misty rain that transformed into nectar when colliding with the flowers. The nectar drops, which looked like pearls, made friends with the pearl ornaments on Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs when they fell on their bodies. For the pleasure of Rādhā-Mādhava, the sakhīs sang sweet songs accompanied by musical instruments. Their songs vibrated in the heavenly abodes. An incomparable fragrance flowed from their open mouths, which attracted the bees to buzz near their faces. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 1.17-25 Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s hair became undone and snarled in Their earrings due to the vigorous swinging. The flower sashes around Their waists tangled in Their jeweled waist bells. Their wilted garlands snagged in Their bracelets. Govinda-līlāmṛta 14.55 As the moon of bliss gradually waxed during Rādhā-Śyāma’s swing pastimes, Their necklaces, earrings and garlands danced. Their waistbells and anklebells jingled pleasantly like musical instruments and They smiled in satisfaction. Rādhā-Mādhava’s lotus eyes also swung up and down,pushed by the waves of beauty that arose from the swelling ocean of each other’s ever-increasing bodily luster. The sakhīs’ eyes attained a treasure of joy. Rādhā-Mādhava’s minds were also swinging. Lust did not arise to disturb Their swing festival due to the strong influence of the līlā-śakti [personified as Vṛndā-devī]. The tree branches, moving up and down with the swing’s rapid movements, served Rādhā-Mādhava by fanning Them with their leaves and fragrant flowers. The many artistically strung flower garlands tied to the tree branches also moved along with the swing. Swarms of bees tried to land on the garlands. Failing in their attempts, however, the bees simply buzzed loudly while chasing the swinging garlands. The sakhīs drowned in bliss watching Rādhā-Mādhava move the swing faster and faster by kicking off with Their feet and leaning forward and back. Rādhā-Mādhava sat facing each other. When the swing reached its highest point Rādhā was up and Kṛṣṇa down and vice versa. Rādhikā’s necklaces touched Kṛṣṇa’s chest when He was below. Kṛṣṇa’s Vaijayantī garland rubbed against Rādhā’s blouse when She was below. Witnessing this, thrilled the hearts of the sakhīs and mañjarīs. Rādhā suddenly saw Her own reflection in the emerald mirror of Kṛṣṇa’s glossy chest, but She could not see Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa saw His reflection in the golden mirror of Rādhā’s body, but He could not see Rādhā. Rādhā-Mādhava felt sad over losing sight of each other and sighed deeply. Their deep breathing dulled the brilliance of Their bodies and made Their reflections disappear. Rādhā-Mādhava then rejoiced in each other’s darśana once again. Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of prankish sports, pushed the swing so fast that Rādhikā’s back touched the leaves high in the kadamba branches. Rādhā became afraid and shouted repeatedly along with Her sakhīs, “O Kṛṣṇa! Stop, don’t swing any more!” Kṛṣṇa pretended not hear them and swung faster. Rādhā’s braid loosened, Her veil fell off and Her ornaments flew here and there. Rādhā, fearing that Her petticoat might fly up, tried to hold it down by keeping Her feet together, but She could not. Kṛṣṇa laughed in satisfaction observing Rādhā’s predicament. Again, Kṛṣṇa increased the speed. Rādhā, Her eyes anxious with fear, slipped off Her seat and landed on Śyāma. Kṛṣṇa held Rādhā tightly to His chest with His arms. He continued swinging faster and faster, furiously pushing off with His feet. The union of Rādhā-Mādhava’s divine bodies looked like the union of a golden campaka flower and blue lotus. The joining of the two beautiful flowers dispersed an irresistable fragrance that rose above the heavens to enter the nose of Lakṣmī and the other residents of Vaikuṇṭha. The sakhīs worried over the safety of Rādhā-Mādhava, who were swinging rapidly without holding on. The gopīs grabbed the ropes and brought the swing to a halt. Rādhā slid off the swing to mingle with Her sakhīs. She told them how Kṛṣṇa had teased and embarrassed Her. Rādhā sat Lalitā, the leader of the eight sakhīs, next to Kṛṣṇa and pushed the swing Herself while singing sweetly. Kṛṣṇa behaved the same way with Lalitā as did with Rādhā. He repeated the performance with Viśākhā and the other main sakhīs. Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself in many forms to ride on the countless swings along with two sakhīs. How could Kṛṣṇa do it without getting tired? What is impossible for Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of prema? Each gopī thought that Kṛṣṇa was sitting alone with Her and beholding her face. This is not astonishing since nothing is impossible for Kṛṣṇa’s icchā-śakti [desire potency].Vṛndā showed the Divine Couple a swing shaped like a lotus. The center seat, which was the pericarp of the lotus, was strewn with stemless flowers, covered by soft cloth and decorated with flower pillows. Kṛṣṇa sat there resting His left arm on Rādhā’s shoulder. The eight main sakhīs sat on the eight surrounding petals and the sixteen assistant sakhīs sat on the outer sixteen petals. Vṛndā offered tasty dates, jambu, grapes and other fruits to Rādhā-Mādhava. They enjoyed the meal and the sakhīs ate Their remnants. Before eating the fruits, Rādhā-Mādhava drank pānaka, which defeated the pride of nectar. They lovingly gave each other golden betel leaves after Their meal. Vṛndā and Nāndīmukhī pushed the swing back and forth. Everyone on the lotus swing experienced the supreme happiness. The mañjarīs, their faces shining with joy, sang different songs. Kṛṣṇa used the swing pastimes to conquer the sakhīs and seize the jewels of their kisses and embraces. After some time, Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs jumped off swing and wandered from grove to grove. Kṛṣṇa observed the yūthikā buds of the monsoon season and thought, “These buds are like Rādhā’s gentle smile, which She sometimes reveals and other times conceals.” Kṛṣṇa picked some yūthīkā buds and strung them into a garland to wear over His heart. The rain clouds were Kṛṣṇa’s color and the lightning resembled the luster of the gopīs. The red indragopa insects on the ground resembled the gopīs’ red foot lac. When the black clouds poured heavy rain, the flowers and creepers blossomed with festivity. The fruits took on a beauteous splendor and experienced long-lasting happiness. The monsoon forest (harṣāvarṣa) also immersed in showers of joy (harṣāvarṣa) from the clouds’ heavy rains. (inner meaning: When Kṛṣṇa showered His madhura rasa, the sakhīs’ beauty and attachment increased and they experienced continual bliss. By that, the monsoon forest also submerged in bliss.)
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 1.27-52
-L: The autumn forest
/Q: The clever, youthful Cupid named Kṛṣṇa proceeded to the place called Śāradamoda (pleasure of autumn), glorious with fully blooming white, blue and red lotuses and swaying white water lilies. The lakes reverberated with the cries of ducks, swans, cranes, herons and curlews. The refreshing pools of water were rimmed with jewels and tasted sweeter than nectar. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.22 Kundalatā said, “O king and queen of Vṛndāvana! Look at the forest, so beautifully decorated by Your sakhī, the autumn season. She eagerly waits to serve You with her eyes of khañjana birds, face of lotus flowers, curling hair of darting bees, breasts of frolicking cakravāka birds, dress of white clouds, lips of red lotuses, pearl necklace of murmuring cranes and her earrings of blue lotus. O my master and mistress, please glance upon her. “For Your pleasure, she has crafted ornaments of raṅgaṇa and jātī flowers, tiaras of kunda flowers, earrings of red and blue lotuses and a bower bed of naturally falling śephālikā flowers. Now she is gazing at the path by which You will approach, longing for the chance to offer all these things to You. Govinda-līlāmṛta 13.6-8 “The autumn season reigns like a king with its incomparable display of beauty and opulence. It provides flowerbeds from the fallen petals of the land lotuses, a sparkling canopy of unlimited stars in the nocturnal sky and cāmaras made of kāśa flowers fluttering in the wind.” Ānanda-vṛndāvana- campū 1.68 Vṛndā offered a beautiful lotus flower to Kṛṣṇa. Śyāma gazed briefly at Rādhā, kissed the flower andsaid, “O lotus! You have defeated everyone on earth with your sweet fragrance.” Rādhā responded with mild anger. Kṛṣṇa continued, “O sakhī! Why has Your face become red and filled with frowns when I glorified the lotus? I know the reason. Your face turned angry red because I crushed Your pride by praising the lotus instead of You. Well, let Me smell Your face and then the lotus to determine which smells best. I will then loudly proclaim the glories of the winner with My flute.” Kṛṣṇa kissed Rādhā’s face before She could realize it and remarked with surprise, “Aha sakhī! Your lovely face has a matchless fragrance. Do not be angry with Me for nothing!” Kṛṣṇa thought, “I made Rādhā angry by praising the lotus flower, so now let Me criticize it and make Rādhā happy.” Kṛṣṇa said, “O lotus! What a fool you are! Are you not ashamed of uselessly blooming before the face of the lady who excels you in both beauty and fragrance? Or do you act like this because you are dumb like the water and mud that bore you? “O Rādhā! The wind is the proof that the fragrance of Your face excels the lotus. The wind teaches the trees and creepers to dance and as payment they give their nectar. Not being satisfied, however, the wind comes and flutters the edge of Your veil to attain the priceless fortune of smelling the unparalleled nectar of Your face.” Lalitā queried, “Why have You given up relishing the nectar of Rādhā’s lotus face, of which You have taken only a whiff? This worry now devours me.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “O Lalitā! Do not be depressed. Is there any harm in taking only three or four drops from the rivers of sweetness constantly flowing from Kiśorī’s face?” Śyāma raised His eyebrows and then lovingly embraced Rādhikā with His powerful snake-like left arm while freely drinking the nectar of Her lips. The sakhīs shivered in bliss observing the effulgent faces of the Divine Couple. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 12.7-16 Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs meandered into the forest called Hemanta Santoṣa (satisfaction of winter season). The forest was golden red with ripe mangos, orange with ripe tangerines, yellow with star fruits, black with bela fruits, white with lodhra flowers and bright green with richly foliated trees.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.62
-L: The winter forest
/Q: Nāndīmukhī said, “O king and queen of Vṛndāvana! The winter forest is eager to please all Your senses with its wealth of charming fruits and flowers. The blossoming jḥiṇṭī, citra, amlāna, kuruṇda and kuruvaka flowers will satisfy Your eyes and nose with their splendor and fragrance. The jubilant love-maddened patridges, quails, bees, kikhi birds and parrots will charm Your ears with their musical chirping. The tasty ripe oranges and citrons will please Your palate with their delightful flavor and the frost-tinged breeze will give a pleasant sensation to Your sense of touch. “O Kṛṣṇa! The forest reminds us of Your splendid transcendental body. As You are surrounded by Your companions (sahacara), the forest is abundant with sahacara flowers. As Your body is endowed with a never ending (amlāna) effulgence, the forest is decorated with spotless amlāna flowers (globe amaranth). Your body increases the influence of Cupid. Similarly, the forest incites the feelings of Cupid. As Your body is decorated with joyful gopīs, the season is decorated with the gopī creepers. As Your body resembles Cupid’s quiver full of flower arrows, the forest abounds with many blooming flower-arrows. As Śukadeva sings Your glories in Bhāgavata, the playful, garrulous parrots (śuka) sing Your glories here.” Kṛṣṇa happily described the winter season to Rādhikā by comparing it to an eloquent dancing maiden. Kṛṣṇa said, “Beautiful faced Rādhā! The ripe grains of various colors are her multi-colored dress. The sweet warbling of the parrots are her verses of praise before the drama. The ripe oranges are her large breasts. O Priyaji! The heat of fires fearfully flees the cold season to seek shelter in well water, the hollows of trees and mountain caves. Govinda-līlāmṛta 13.45-51 “Frost competes with the heat for sovereignty over the earth. Love pangs increase in the breasts of unmarried girls during the long winter nights. Married women avoid the pains by willingly accepting the loving advances of their husbands.” Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.76 “O Rādhikā! Winter’s moonlit nights are long and the days are short. In the diminished rays of the sun, Your lightning-like body shivers of cold. I cannot describe the chill You experience. You can happily pass the cold season by quickly entering the cave of My heart, which has already been warmed up by many wanton women.” Kṛṣṇa pulled Rādhā close to Him with His strong arms. Though Rādhā repeatedly resisted, Śyāma forcibly held Her to His chest. As Rādhā’s belly rubbed firmly against His, Śyāma’s sash loosened and His flute fell on the ground, as if it were angry over being disrespected. Lalitā secretly snatched the flute and said, “O hard dry flute! Sweet songs are your only good quality. However, you have many faults! You are cold in the winter because you are made from sapless wood. You are never warm. O agitator of the world! Now you will get what you deserve!” Lalitā hid the flute in her braid. Kṛṣṇa, under the spell of love, was unaware of the flute theft. Priyaji and Bihārīji felt cold after wandering about. Vṛndā, the caretaker of the forest, joyfully gave Them wintercoats colored crimson, brown, blue and gold. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 13.3-7 In the winter, the damsels of Vraja did not wear pearl ornaments because they were cold by nature. They bound kuruvaka flowers in their hair and rubbed heating lodhra flower pollen into it. Jhiṇṭī flower garlands hung over their budding breasts. To counteract the cold the gopīs’ used heating saffron ointments as cosmetics and chewed betel nuts mixed with cardamom and other hot spices. Heavy clouds of incense lingered in the pastime cottages. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.77-78 Mādhava next went to the forest called Śiśiramoda (pleasure of the dewy season) to reciprocate with its loving affection. The forest wept in bliss and shed tears of dew out of anxiety over Kṛṣṇa’s arrival. She smiled with her blossoming kunda flowers to show her beautiful white teeth. The season mourned in separation from her lover by letting down her hair in the form of damanaka bushes (Indian sagebrush) that glistened in the morning sun.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 3.63
-L: The dewy season forest
/Q: Vṛndā-devī, the keeper of Vṛndāvana, eagerly took the Divine Couple to the next forest. Vṛndā said, “Rādhā-Govinda! This magnificent forest is called Śiśira-rucira (the pleasing dewy season). All the living entities here are shiveriing with cold and their bodily hair stands erect. The sun’s rays are weak due to its southern course, but there is a trace of warmth at the bases of the trees. “How can I describe the beauty of the dewy season? The goddess of the late winter season is dressed in exquisite red garments of splendid javā and bandhūka (scarlet mallow) flowers, a blouse of damanaka flowers and a veil of white kunda flowers. She tenderly praises You through the voices of the partridges and pigeons. “Look! The sunstone (sūryakānta) covered earth below the tall trees is slightly warm from the faint rays of the morning sun passing through the dense foliage. Ruminating deer have gathered there waiting to see You with tear-filled eyes and their hair standing erect. How amazing it is that winter’s chilly dew now defeats the sun’s powerful rays. Sūrya-deva’s beloved lotus is withering and the days have shortened. Alas, besides Bhagavān, who is not controlled by time? “Fearing the cold, Sūrya has hidden his wealth of warmth within the sturdy fortress of the gopīs’ breasts. The gopīs have freely offered the wealth to You for Your enjoyment. Ordinarily, one should not give away another’s wealth, however, the power of the gopīs’ love transgresses all rules of morality.” Vṛndā’s witty words and the beautiful dewy season fully pleased the Lord. Kṛṣṇa addressed Rādhikā in a sweet voice: “Look Sundarī (most beautiful girl)! As harbingers of the dewy season, the bees ignore the withering lotus flowers and play in the blooming kunda flowers. The bees rescued Lakṣmī from Her lotus flower temple, which had been destroyed by the frost, and escorted her to the kunda flowers for shelter. “The cold is Rāhu’s general for defeating the sun. However, it cannot score a complete victory, so the cold attacks the sun’s closest friend, the lotus. Look at the ripe badari fruits. They remind Me of the gopīs’ breasts rising from the Yamunā when I stole their clothes.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 13.55-65 The Vraja-gopīs fixed bandhūka flower garlands in their hair and damanaka flower buds on their ears. They sported garlands of kunda buds and did not wear any jeweled ornaments. Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 1.35 Vṛndā offered Kṛṣṇa some ear ornaments with white, soft centers made of javā buds. Kṛṣṇa draped them over Rādhā’s ears. His hands started trembling and His bodily hair stood up in ecstasy. Rādhā reciprocated by decorating Kṛṣṇa’s ears with kunda flower ornaments. Vṛndā offered Rādhā a white kunda flower garland, which appeared like a garland of red lotuses due to the rosy hue of Rādhā’s palms. When Rādhā hung the garland on Kṛṣṇa’s neck, it looked like a garland of blue lotuses. Kṛṣṇa removed the white kunda garland and put it on Rādhā. It then looked like a golden campaka garland. Viśākhā pronounced with a smile, “O Rādhā-Mādhava! How astonishing! The lusty bumblebees constantly relish the nectar of the kundalatā’s tender flowers.” Citrā said, “O chaste one! It is not so surprising that Kundalatā’s (wife of Subhadra-gopa) lovers are all bumblebees. There is ample precedent for such behavior in the lives of the Praceta sages. They were human beings, but they enjoyed Vārkṣi, the daughter of the trees, as their wife.” Kundalatā responded, “O Citrā! Look, hundreds of wild bees abandoned the nearby bandhujīva flowers to kiss one very special bandhujīva flower.” (All the gopīs left their husbands to worship Kṛṣṇa.) Citrā replied, “Actually, it is not so wonderful. The pure-hearted bees, who sing the fifth note like Kṛṣṇa’s flute, are intent on drinking only the purest, sweetest nectar. For this reason, they will only drink the honey of Kṛṣṇa’s bodily luster and nothing else.”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 13.66-71

-L: Rādhā’s transformations in prema

/Q: One determined bee, attracted by the divine fragrance, tried to land on the lotus faces of the sakhīs. When they checked him, he buzzed over the lotus flower of Rādhā’s face. He went mad by the sweet aroma of Rādhā’s face and hovered around humming loudly. Rādhā glanced fearfully with restless eyes while chasing away the bee with the lotus in Her hand. The bangles on Rādhā’s delicate wrist jingled musically. The greedy bee quickly returned, however, so Rādhā took shelter of Kṛṣṇa and covered Her head with His caddar. When the pesky bee finally flew off to the lotus forest, the sakhīs exclaimed, “Rādhā! You need not fear that bee any longer. We have driven away that crafty bee (madhusūdana), and he has eagerly gone to the padmālī (lotus forest or Padmā’s friend Candrāvalī).” Rādhikā, due to loving absorption, misinterpreted that Madhusūdana Kṛṣṇa had gone to Candrāvalī. Blinded by intense ecstasy in separation, Rādhā could not see that Kṛṣṇa was standing right before Her. With eye gestures, Kṛṣṇa told the sakhīs not to expose Him. The sakhīs obeyed and joined Kṛṣṇa in witnessing Rādhā’s astonishing love-stunned behavior. Govinda-līlāmṛta 14.1-5 Rādhā whispered to Herself, “Alas! Alas! Where has Madhusūdana (Kṛṣṇa) gone? Has He left in response to the piteous crying of the cowherd boys frightened by the forest fire? Has Madhusūdana seen some bad quality in Me? Or has some rival gopī whisked Him away to a private place? Is this why Madhusūdana has so quickly abandoned Me in the forest?” Vidagdha-mādhava 5.46 Rādhā, overwhelmed by prema-vaicittya (loving separation in the presence of the beloved), thought that Her lover had gone to another. Rādhā vented Her jealous anger on Dhaniṣṭhā: “O Dhaniṣṭhā! Where is your arrogant deceitful dancer? Surely, He is dancing to the tune of His cunning partner Candrāvalī.” Dhaniṣṭhā replied, “O sakhī! Śyāma went to the lotus forest (padmālī) to pick some flowers for You.” Rādhā: “O devious woman! He went to padmālī (Padmā, Candrāvalī companion)! What will happen if Kṛṣṇa brings Candrāvalī here?” Dhaniṣṭhā: “Surely the padmālī will wither in front of Your incomparably beautiful face.” Rādhā: “O Dhaniṣṭhā! You are not at fault here. Rather, I am a fool for trusting a messenger like you. Even though I heard that Kṛṣṇa had gone to a dense grove with Śaibyā, I believed your deceptive words. Thus I imagined that Kṛṣṇa had come to Me!” Rādhā lowered Her head in sorrow and spoke in a pensive mood: “What a calamity! Even Dhaniṣṭhā, who is as dear to Me as life itself, has cheated Me. Moreover, Kṛṣṇa has foresaken Me to enjoy with Candrāvalī in My favorite forest. He has become the lover of My rival. Can My eyes bear to see it? I think death would be more auspicious. That great cheater hid Candrāvalī in a solitary grove near the bank of My kuṇḍa [Rādhā-kunda]. He then brought Me here, told all sorts of lies and deserted Me to rejoin her.” Lalitā said, “O sakhī! Many times, I have witnessed Kṛṣṇa’s cheating. You are a simple, honest girl and do not understand the truth about this Kṛṣṇa. Just forget Him and let us all go home.” Lalitā held Rādhārāṇī’s hand and encouraged Her to return home. Rādhā became frightened and distressed at the prospect of separation from Kṛṣṇa. Overwhelmed in love, Rādhā said, “O sakhī Lalitā! Why does My obstinate, crooked mind overlook Kṛṣṇa’s obvious faults and imagine so many non-existent virtues in Him? What should I do?” Lalitā: “Just as ripe rice paddy remains hidden within the husk, a woman should conceal her amorousdesires in order to protect her modesty.” Rādhā: “O Lalitā! Give up uselessly moralizing on womanly virtue. Such talk merely pains My ears. Just look at Me! My life airs are about to depart, My heart is trembling and My body is tossing in agony. To hell with My honor, My shyness, My good-reputation and My peaceful composure! O Lalitā! I offer My respects to you. Quickly take Me to My beloved!” Govinda-līlāmṛta 14.6-15 Though Kṛṣṇa stood before Her, Rādhā’s mind and intelligence reeled from the pain of separation born of Her deep attachment. Rādhā held some straw between Her teeth and sighed, “O sakhī! Please show Me Kṛṣṇa somewhere!” Seeing that, even Kṛṣṇa became struck with wonder. Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 15.148 Lalitā said, “O Rādhā! I have seen Your simple and pure-hearted nature. Kṛṣṇa is the king of impudent rascals and the inconstant debauchee-lover of many beautiful girls. Ah, Kṛṣṇa will simply cheat You. Be careful! Let us not make things worse.” Rādhā replied, “What more can He do to hurt Me?” Suddenly detecting Her own image reflected on Kṛṣṇa’s chest, Rādhā thought that Kṛṣṇa was embracing another lover from behind. Rādhā thought that reflection was Candrāvalī. Immersed in jealousy, Rādhikā turned Her face away and trembled in anger. Kundalatā, understanding Kṛṣṇa’s visual hint, said, “O Rādhā! The lover You are yearning to see now stands before You anxious to embrace You. Immediately embrace Him. Why do You uselessly turn away in anger?” Rādhā said, “O cheater! You brought Me here just to witness Kṛṣṇa embracing Candrāvalī. Can you not see what is happening?” Kṛṣṇa said, “O Rādhā! You are mistaking if You think that Candrāvalī is embracing Me. Some unknown very chaste damsel came here saying, ‘I am a goddess of the forest and a friend of Rādhikā.’ Utilizing her mystic power, the forest goddess forcibly kissed and embraced Me against My will and clung to My chest. I could not slip out of Her grasp even with the greatest effort, and She would not let go of Me. Although I begged Her to stop, the lusty girl refused to leave Me. O Rādhā! Please tell Your friend to stop hurting Me.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 14.16-24 Viśākhā whispered in Rādhikā’s ear, “O sakhī! Please listen attentively; otherwise, later You will become the laughing stock of all. Why has Your face suddenly changed color? It is not another woman on Kṛṣṇa’s mirror-like chest! You are seeing Your own reflection. Therefore become happy.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 10.30 Lalitā confirmed it by also whispering, “Rādhā! This is definitely You reflected on Kṛṣṇa’s chest, not Candrāvalī.” Rādhā realized Her mistake and hung Her lovely head in embarassment, while Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs laughed aloud. Kundalatā said, “O Rādhā! Even though Your lover stands before Your eyes, You cannot see Him. You took Your own reflection in Kṛṣṇa’s chest to be a rival sakhī! You are always afraid that Candrāvalī may appear at any moment. O Rādhārāṇī! Indeed, this is simply the manifestation of Your wonderful praṇaya nartana (the dancing of Your ecstatic love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa).” Govinda-līlāmṛta 14.25-26 Vṛndā said, “Even though the cakorīs of Your eyes continually drink the flood of nectar from the fullmoon of Hari’s face, still they are not satisfied. The cakorīs are rolling around in an intoxicated state and repeatedly discharging that nectar in the form of tears.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.81 Kundalatā told Kṛṣṇa, “O killer of Agha! What are these unprecedented waves of amorous pastimes wherein You mutually try to defeat each other? Now I can see that Rādhā has firmly bound the mad elephant of Your mind with the chains of Her love. And You have bound the doe of Rādhā’s mind with the ropes of the ever-fresh qualities of Your blissful love.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.150 Vṛndā said to Kṛṣṇa, “O Prāṇeśvara (Lord of my heart)! You live in the groves of Govardhana. You are expert in the art of conjugal love like the king of elephants. The skillful artisan of śṛṅgāra-rasa (erotic conjugal love) has liquefied the lac of Your heart and Rādhā’s by the sāttvika bhāvas such as perspiration. Then he joined them together as one and dyed them with the vermilion of youthful love to brighten the interior of the palace of the universe.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.155 Pastime of drinking mādhvīka nectar Kṛṣṇa, on the pretext of joking, flirted with the cleverly talented Vraja-gopīs, who had mastered the sixty-four arts. Kṛṣṇa kissed them, stroked their breasts and decorated them with flowers. Śyāma appeared like the king of cuckoos, intoxicated by tasting the fruits and flowers of a host of creepers. Kṛṣṇa, enjoying with the sakhīs, wandered here and there until He came to a grove on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa named Lalitānandadā-kuñja (Lalitā’s delight). Govinda-līlāmṛta 13. 14 Kṛṣṇa entered the cool shady plaza meant for wine drinking and happily took rest there, surrounded by the beautiful lotus-eyed gopīs. Śyāma wore a radiant yellow dhotī and glittering ornaments as He sat amidst the lovely damsels of Vraja. He looked like a blue sapphire locket within a golden necklace. Five sakhīs, holding cāmara whisks in their hands, which eclipsed the elegance of red lotus flowers, happily fanned Rādhā, who was tired from playing and Her lover Kṛṣṇa. The unparalleled elegance of Rādhā’s divine form easily defeated hundreds of Cupids. The sakhīs dissipated Mādhava’s fatigue by fanning and foot massages. Vṛndā brought an attractive crystal decanter full of mādhvīka nectar [honey wine ambrosia] and placed it before the Divine Couple. While looking into Their goblets Rādhā-Mādhava mistook the reflections of Their beautiful faces and eyes for blooming golden and blue lotus flowers with two khañjana birds. The greedy bumblebees of Kiśorī’s eyes at once flew into the blue lotus flower in Her goblet and got stuck in the thick honey of its divine beauty. Acyuta’s bumblebee eyes dove into the golden lotus flower in His goblet and met the same fate. How amazing! Rādhā-Mādhava became intoxicated with passionate desires even without drinking. Their matchlessly sweet beauty was the elixir, Their mouths were the glasses, the wine was the mirror to see Their beauty, Their eyes were the bumblebees that drank that elixir and all Their other senses became eyes to appreciate the beauty. Rādhā-Mādhava’s minds and hearts trembled with amorous desires, Their limbs became stunned and Their bodily hair stood up in ecstasy. Kundalatā commented, “O Rādhā-Mādhava! Your eyes have savored the honey of each other’s lotus faces. Now please engage Your tongues in drinking the wine, sweetly scented with the reflections of Your lotus faces and lotus eyes!” Kṛṣṇa placed the goblet of wine near Priyaji’s lotus mouth and said, “My beloved, please drink.” Rādhā bowed Her head in shyness and grasped the goblet. Kiśorī covered Her sweet face with Her veil, and scented the honey wine with the touch of Her lips before giving the goblet back to Śyāma. Now that the mādhvīka nectar was surcharged with Rādhā’s smile and the touch of Her lips, Kṛṣṇa took great interest in drinking. The wine was prepared from the fruits of Vṛndāvana’s wonderful trees and creepers. Rādhā charmed Kṛṣṇa with Her unique qualities. Kṛṣṇa placed the goblet of honey wine in Her hand. Rādhā again shyly covered Her face with Her veil and drank the wine sweetly scented by Her lover’s lips. Vṛndā-devī and Kundalatā took Rādhā-Mādhava’s wine remnants and mixed a little in each cup that they happily offered to the sakhīs. Kṛṣṇa employed His yogamaya potency to manifest one form of Himself on the right side of each beautiful gopī, who thought Kṛṣṇa was drinking only with her. The gopīs got drunk from imbibing the kadambarī nectar [liquor from honey and kadamba flowers]. The lotus eyes of the sakhīs opened widely, turned reddish at the corners and started rolling to and fro. The sweet fragrance of the gopīs’ faces beckoned and delighted swarms of bees. Their delicate petal-like lips emitted moonbeam smiles. The sweet ambrosia of the pretty faces of the gopīs became goblets to quench the thirst of Śyāma’s eyes and tongue. Similarly, the luscious lips of Śyāma became goblets for the intoxicated, love crazed doe-eyed damsels. Vṛndā-devī and her helpers presented varieties of snacks, drinks and spicy condiments for the pleasure of Rādhā-Govinda and the sakhīs. Vṛndā and her assistants satisfied their long-standing desire to intoxicate their eyes by watching Rādhā-Mādhava feed each other the snacks. The taste of each other’s sweet lips acted as a delightful appetizer to induce Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs to drink the honey beverage before them. The tasty appetizer increased Their thirst. Before long, They became intoxicated by tasting the honey of amorous desire. Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs, due to the wine and the intoxication of love, lost the power to discriminate between the lips and the liquor, the wine and the snacks and the lover and the beloved. The beautiful golden-limbed gopīs became agitated with amorous desires by the passion of springtime (mādhava), the mādhvikā nectar and the exciting touch of Mādhava (Kṛṣṇa). The gopīs, in their inebriated condition, were unaware that their garments and ornaments were slipping off their bodies. They chattered nonsense, laughed aloud for no reason and ardently answered questions never asked. The Vraja-gopīs filled Murāri with delight as they staggered toward Him with slurred speech, loosened clothes, disheveled hair and erotic intentions. Their reddish rolling eyes, mouths fragrant with liquor, joking words, fidgety glances, and all kinds of shameless behavior stimulated Kṛṣṇa’s heart with the utmost joy. The Vraja-gopīs, due to inborn feminine shyness, generally concealed their intense love for Kṛṣṇa deep within their hearts. The onslaught of the honey-wine, however, forced that love to rise from their hearts and reside in their lotus eyes. One young gopī with bewildered rolling eyes and a languid body, who was inebriated from overindulgence in mādhvikā nectar, suddenly began stuttering: “La La La Lalitā! Loo loo loo look at this! Why are Rādhā-Mādhava and Their f f f friends ro-ro-rotating in the sky along with the fo fo fo forest and the ea ea ea earth?” Govinda-līlāmṛta 14.77-104 Another garrulous gopī spoke with slurred incoherent words: “What misfortune! Lo-lo look! The sky is f--f falling! The earth is tu-tu turning! O Lord, my slender body is sha-sha shaking. Please ca-ca catch me before I fa-fa fall down.” The fearful drunken gopī then tightly clasped Kṛṣṇa’s neck with her arms. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.165 Rādhā Ramaṇa’s drinking pastimes had not yet reached their climax. Rādhā-Mādhava, stumbling along in each other’s arms, expressed Their hearts through the touch of Their hands. The Divine Couple mumbled meaningless words in each other’s ears, and kissed each other’s cheeks a hundred times. Rādhā-Mādhava encircled each other’s necks with Their arms and poured honey wine in each other’s mouth. Rādhā Ramaṇa enjoyed Their pastimes of drinking honey wine. Rādhā-Mādhava, bewildered by the bliss of intoxication, uttered words contrary to Their natures. Rādhā took Kṛṣṇa to be Herself and said, “O sakhī! That lover of Yours, Kṛṣṇa, is a cheat.” Assuming Rādhā’s role, Kṛṣṇa replied, “O Kṛṣṇa! Be pleased with Me.” Rādhā: “O sakhī! Is Kṛṣṇa meeting You now?” Kṛṣṇa: “O master, I am nothing but Your servant.” May Rādhā-Mādhava’s exalted state of divine intoxication forever purify us. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.30-31 Rādhā stuttered, “O Hari! The sound of Your fla-fla flute cha-cha churns the Vraja-gopīs’ hearts. Afflicted La-la Lalitā now takes shelter of You and wo-wo-wo worships You.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.88 Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful sweet face was more attractive than a blooming lotus surrounded by bumblebees delirious from its fragrance. Kṛṣṇa became inflamed with amorous desires from drinking the honey wine and the nectar of the gopīs’ lips. When Kṛṣṇa greedily looked at the gopīs, the beauty of His rolling red eyes defeated that of restless bumblebees sitting on a red lotus flower swaying in the breeze. Two sakhīs named Riraṁsā (desire to savor love’s delights) and Suṣupsa (desire to sleep) arrived to serve the Divine Couple. The other sakhīs simply fell asleep. Kundalatā, understanding Rādhā-Mādhava’s desire for intimate pastimes, sent lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa to pick some aśoka flowers to decorate Rādhā’s ears. Meanwhile, some dedicated maidservants escorted red-eyed Rādhā to Lalitā’s kuñja to rest upon a bed of flowers. The drowsy gopīs’ yawning lotus mouths bore the most wonderful aroma of liquor, their eyes rolled in intoxication and their garments were in disarray. In this condition, they stumbled into their own bowers and fell upon the beds made of soft leaves and flower petals scented with lotus pollen. The lotus-faced sakhīs fluttered their eyes like humming birds before collapsing upon the beds. Their sleeping quarters were richly adorned with flowers, guñja malas and humming bees. Flasks of scented drinking water, containers of betel nuts and sandalwood paste and aromatic oils waited on tables beside the flowerbeds.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 14.105- 12
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (1:36 p.m.—2:00 p.m.)
-L: Sleeping pastimes
/Q: Kṛṣṇa sported aśoka flowers over each ear and held more in His hands for Rādhā’s earrings when He returned from flower picking. Following Vṛndā’s eye signal, Kṛṣṇa eagerly entered the grove near Rādhā-kunda wherein Rādhā was resting. The swan-like sakhīs in attendance immediately flew away upon seeing the mad elephant called Kṛṣṇa approaching the celestial Ganga named Rādhā. The mad elephant drank the nectarean form of the celestial Gaṅgā with His lotus eyes. Trembling with passion, the elephant used His hands to break apart the śaivāla [moss] plants of that river’s bodice and the lotus flowers of Her undergarments. Sleeping Rādhā considered Kṛṣṇa’s touching Her breasts and tugging at Her undergarment to be part of Her dream. Rādhā pretended to be displeased and staunchly resisted Kṛṣṇa’s advances, saying, “Hari! Do-do don’t touch Me! Wha-wha-wha what do You want? Let Me sl-sl sleep for a while. My eyes are spi- spi-spi spinning around with intoxication!” Rādhā continued sleeping. She smiled gently, cried and spoke some unclear syllables while trying to brush away Her lover’s restless hands. Kṛṣṇa smiled while watching Rādhā’s skill in deflecting His hands. When Rādhā suddenly woke up, She saw Śyāma doing everything She perceived in Her dream! Rādhārāṇī repeatedly opened and closed Her eyes. The words and actions of Rādhā, who was drunk with divine love and honey wine, were the same in sleeping and waking. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.1-7 As Kṛṣṇa pulled Rādhā’s hand away and grabbed Her waistbelt, Her bangles and waistbells jingled loudly. Kiśorī’s erotic bliss subdued Her intelligence. But Her body scolded Kṛṣṇa, who was overwhelmed with intense craving. Rādhā abandoned Her shyness in Kṛṣṇa’s embrace and sighed ecstatically whenever Kṛṣṇa kissed Her. Rādhā’s sweet murmurs filled the bower. Kṛṣṇa expanded His confidential pastimes with Rādhikā by displaying His expertise in love. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.14-15 When Kṛṣṇa embraced Rādhikā, it seemed that a rumbling rain cloud had covered a golden mountain. Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha gem rose like a brillant sun between that cloud and golden mountain. Śrī- govinda-rati-mañjarī 5.92 When the encounter of love began, thrill bumps of ecstasy hindered firm embraces; blinking eyes interrupted the joy of contemplating one another with searching looks; the utterances of small love cries checked the sipping of the honey of each other’s lips and the attainment of rapture impeded the battle of Cupid. Yet, even these seeming hindrances enhanced the delight in love play. Kṛṣṇa, entwined in Rādhā’s rapturous arms, was repeatedly crushed by the weight of Her breasts and pierced by Her fingernails. Śyāma’s lips were wounded by the bites of Rādhā’s teeth and He was overwhelmed by the thirst of Her thighs. Rādhā seized Śyāma’s hair with Her hands and bewitched Him with the honey ambrosia of Her lips. Kṛṣṇa derived immense pleasure from such sweet torments. Indeed, the course of love is crooked and wondrous! Desiring to triumph over Her lover in the erotic war-game, Rādhā launched a bold offensive above Śyāma. After a few minutes however, Rādhā’s hips stopped swaying, Her vine-like arms grew languid, Her breasts heaved and Her eyes closed. Indeed, can a woman ever succeed in playing the role of the aggressive man? Due to the abundant rapture of conjugal pleasure, Rādhā lost all control of Her body. Rādhā’s face revealed extraordinary elegance with Her eyes half-closed in languor, Her cheeks quivering with delight and Her half-open mouth emitting pitiful murmuring sounds. Kṛṣṇa, overwhelmed in ecstatic bliss, repeatedly kissed Rādhā while embracing Her breasts made firm by Her indrawn sighs. Rādhā’s lovely lips were washed by the gleaming rays of Her teeth whenever She uttered indistinct sounds during amorous play. Gīta-govinda 12.10-12, 15 Pearl drops of perspiration and disheveled locks of hair covered Rādhārāṇī’s forehead. Rādhā’s hips were motionless but Her breasts heaved with Her deep sighs. Rādhā’s arms moved indolently and Her eyes were half-closed. Kṛṣṇa experienced the topmost joy beholding Rādhā’s defeat in the amorous battle. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.21 Rādhikā’s dress and ornaments were in disarray. Her tired motionless form glistened with drops of perspiration. Her eyes were closed in sleepiness and Her voice was ornamented with amorous whispering. In this way, Rādhikā relaxed upon the chest of Her lover Kṛṣṇa like a streak of lightning resting on a fresh rain cloud. With each deep breath Rādhikā’s belly repeatedly touched Kṛṣṇa’s belly. It appeared by this that Rādhā was reviving Kṛṣṇa from His ecstatic rapture. Kṛṣṇa relished the sublime beauty of Rādhā’s weary body and keenly hankered to touch Her. Kṛṣṇa’s desire disappeared however, upon meeting the maidservant of Rādhā’s fatigue. Slowly disentangling Himself from Kiśorī’s embrace, Śyāma lovingly dried the perspiration from Her body with His cloth. Kṛṣṇa then neatly arranged Rādhā’s disarrayed hair and garments with His lotus hands. Moonfaced Rādhā, assuming a domineering mood, ordered Kṛṣṇa, “Arrange My clothing and ornaments nicely!” Kṛṣṇa hesitated for a moment because He wanted to embarrass Rādhā before Her sakhīs. However, after Rādhikā repeatedly requested Him, Kṛṣṇa started redressing Her. Kiśorī became agitated by Kṛṣṇa’s tender touch and ordered Him to stop. She said, “O lover! Who asked You to dress Me? Stop wasting Your time and leave Me alone! I do not want to wear these heavy ornaments right now. Besides, I feel dizzy and want to sleep for awhile.” Kṛṣṇa succumbed to amorous desires after revelling in Priyaji’s gentle smile and sweet whimperings. Somehow, Kṛṣṇa cooled down and finished decorating Śrīmatī’s splendid form. Rādhā in turn adorned Govinda’s handsome body. The mañjarīs only source of happiness was serving the Divine Couple. After patiently waiting outside the kuñja, the mañjarīs excitedly entered with varieties of service paraphernalia in their hands. The mañjarīs, maddened with devotion, offered pān, fragrant perfumes, scented cool water and flower garlands. They fanned Rādhā-Govinda with cāmaras, massaged Their lotus feet and rendered various other services. The Divine Couple became pleasantly scented and completely free from all fatigue. Rādhikā hinted with Her expressive, smiling eyes, “O Priyatama! I do not feel happy without My lotus-faced sakhīs, who are intoxicated and asleep in the nearby groves. Please wake them up and bring them here.” Śyāma was reluctant to leave. He finally consented and went to awaken the gopīs after Rādhā repeatedly begged Him with joking words. Outside Rādhā’s bower Kṛṣṇa pondered, “Shall I first visit Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā or all the sakhīs simultaneously?” Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself into many forms and happily entered all the bowers at once, just as the Supersoul enters all material bodies at the same time. Mādhava enjoyed with the gopīs like a mad elephant frolicking amongst a cluster of lotus flowers. Kṛṣṇa performed the same enchanting pastimes with the sakhīs that Rādhā, the leader of the sakhīs, had relished both while dreaming and awake. Kṛṣṇa acted as an expert wrestler to please the sakhīs. He fought each powerful sakhī and simultaneously defeated them all in close combat. The signs of a completed yajña are still visible even after the area has been cleansed. Similarly, there were numerous signs of conjugal happiness still visible on the gopīs after the completion of the kandarpa- yajña (sacrifice to Cupid), even though Kṛṣṇa diligently tried to remove them by submissively dressing and decorating them. The sakhīs, with half-closed eyes, stumbled along the path to Rādhā’s kuñja. Their heads were bowed in embarrassment and their arms hung limply. The sakhīs knitted their eyebrows in a show of loving anger over Rādhā’s sending Kṛṣṇa to them. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.23-39 Rādhā smiled slightly upon detecting the love marks on Her girlfriends. Seeing that they intended to rebuke Her, Rādhā said, “O Lalitā! How unfortunate! How did your lips and breasts get cut? Did you enter a cave to catch a snake?” Lalitā replied, “O Rādhā! The snake that bit us is under Your control and You sent Him to us. O fair- faced one! In Vraja, You are famous for this, so do not laugh vainly. If I describe Your exploits, will not shyness personified appear and stop Me from speaking?” Śyāmasundara suddenly appeared on the scene and said, “O ladies! Listen as I describe the astonishing charm of Rādhā’s most recent activities.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 19.5-7
-L: Talks about Rādhā’s Intimacy
/Q: Kṛṣṇa said, “Your sakhī’s pearl necklace danced upon Her breast in the passion of love. Its central jewel then ferociously attacked My sober Kaustubha gem. Now just reflect upon it with your intelligence. Afterall, the proverb says ‘whoever gets attacked should counterattack.’ Therefore, My Kaustubha should attack Her pearl necklace with a hundred times more ferocity.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 5.50 Lalitā rejoined, “O Mādhava! By showing Your affection to Rādhā, You have received the red color from Her feet shining on Your chest as the Kaustubha gem. You have offered Your betel-stained lips to Rādhā’s eyes and colored Your lips with Her black eyeliner in return. Indeed, Your amorous expertise is equally displayed on Your own limbs as well.” Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 8.124 Vṛndā said, “Rādhā! Your trickling tears of bliss have washed away Your eyeliner. Your perspiration has washed away the attractive red kuṅkuma from Your breasts. As You gaze upon Śyāma’s handsome broad chest, You yearn to embrace Him. As You anticipate divine union, Your undergarment has suddenly loosened. I think it wants to be untied altogether!” Vidagdha-mādhava 7.41 Lalitā quipped, “Rādhā, You appear to be helplessly tossed about by the moon induced tidal waves of happiness arising in the black ocean of nectar. You are overly excited from repeatedly drinking the nectar of that ocean with the cupped hands of Your crooked eyes. Now it seems You want to swallow the entire ocean as Agastya Rṣī once did.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 7.49 Lalitā, on the pretext of speaking to Dhaniṣṭhā, continued to praise Rādhikā: “How astonishing, big breasted Dhaniṣṭhā! You are wearing fine imported Chinese silk, however, its constant rubbing has turned your soft body red like sandalwood. You should not wear such cloth.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 10.40 Kṛṣṇa said, “O Priyaji! Your curling locks, Your wide restless eyes, Your shyly bowed head, Your firm breasts and slender waist, Your vine-like arms and Your jewel-like fingernails exhibit the quintessence of elegance. Why bother wearing clothing and ornaments? The jubilant festival of Your transcendental beauty sends endless ripplings of bliss throughout the three worlds.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 4.8 Rādhā cast a crooked glance at Kṛṣṇa, but He kept speaking: “My dear moon-faced Rādhārāṇī! Has the lightning flash learned the art of moving swiftly from Your restless sidelong glance. Or has Your sidelong glance learned fickleness from the lightning flash? O Rādhā! In any case, I think Your sidelong glance must be the teacher because it has completely captured My restless mind.” Ujjvala- nīlamaṇi 4.22 Rādhā mumbled some indistinct words. Kṛṣṇa continued, “O Cārumukhi (beautiful face)! What perpetual sweetness is present in the words arising from Your splendid mouth? It fills the cuckoo with despair and makes heavenly nectar completely useless in comparison.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 4.27 One sakhī, seeing Rādhā cast crooked glances toward Kṛṣṇa, said, “Kiśorī dispatches so many darting glances from the corners of Her playfully crooked, glistening eyes. The vines of Rādhā’s eyebrows dance excitedly. Rādhā’s face is illumined by the moonlight of Her jasmine flower smile and glittering earrings swing on Her cheeks. Every half-word Rādhā speaks is an inscrutable, powerful mantra to invoke the presence of Cupid. Rādhikā has flooded Śyāma’s heart with the waves of Her charming playfulness.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 4.41 Kṛṣṇa offered more praises, “O Rādhā! The slightest movement of Your eyebrow has completely conquered Cupid’s indomitable bow. Banana trunks hide their faces in shame upon seeing the splendor of Your luscious thighs. Your breasts cavort like a pair of cakravāka birds. Without a doubt, You are the most beautiful crest-jewel among all exalted women.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 5.29 Turning toward Viśākhā, Kṛṣṇa remarked, “I sport with many lovely damsels in the village. However, their sweet love talks do not please Me as much as two or three broken syllables of jealous insults uttered by Rādhā, Her lips quivering in anger.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 12.16 Rādhā beamed a gentle sweet smile in appreciation of Śyāma’s witty words. Kiśorī’s eyes moistened and Her pupils danced to and fro. Kṛṣṇa’s blooming bumblebee eyes fervently sipped the honey sweetness of Rādhā’s gorgeous lotus face at that moment. Madhusūdana’s charming pastimes of amorous love are a limitless ocean of nectar. They are completely inaccessible to great demigods like Brahmā and Śiva; what to speak of ordinary mortals. Even amongst the rare premi-bhaktas who enter the sacred abode of vraja-prema, only those endowed with madhura-rasa can constantly relish the sweetness of Rādhā-Govinda’s confidential pastimes. Who can describe the good fortune of a mediocre poet like me [Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī], who, though totally ignorant of rasa, has been privileged to touch that sweet ocean? The mañjarīs, knowing that Hari and His beloved girlfriends were tired from enjoying different pastimes, invited Them to play in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The devoted mañjarīs tied up the sakhīs’ hair, loosened from the heat of Cupid’s battle. After removing their heavy clothes and ornaments, they dressed them in fine white bathing outfits just suitable for water sports. The beautiful-eyed gopīs appeared lovely and attractive in their light bathing attire.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.42-44
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (2:00 p.m.—2:24 p.m.)
-L: Divine water sports in Rādhā-kuṇḍa
/Q: The luster of Kṛṣṇa’s body eclipsed the beauty of hundreds of moons (puṣkara), His eyes resembled lotus flowers (puṣkara) blooming in the blazing sun and His sidelong glances defeated Cupid’s flower arrows (puṣkara). Kṛṣṇa was eager to play in the water (puṣkara) to mitigate His love-fatigue and that of His girlfriends. Kṛṣṇa dipped into the lotus-filled (puṣkarinī) Rādhā-kuṇḍa to sport. He

/Q: looked like an intoxicated bull elephant (puṣkari) about to enjoy with his bevy of female elephants (puṣkarinī). The two mad elephants of Kṛṣṇa’s eyes expanded in ecstasy upon viewing the glistening bodies of the gopīs whose lovely features resembled the beautiful Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The attractive azure eyes of the gopīs were blue lotuses, their faces flushed with love were pink lotuses, their bouncing locks of hair were swarms of restlessly moving bees, their full breasts were cakravāka birds and their graceful arms were stems of lotus flowers. Some timid gopīs stood on the shore, hesitating to enter. The gopīs in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, splashed them with water, tugged on their garments and giggled while pulling them into the kuṇḍa. Hari stood navel deep in water and chuckled while splashing all the gopīs. Some gopīs fearfully fled to places in Rādhā-kuṇḍa where the water only reached their knees or thighs. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.45-49 The gopīs keenly desired to play, but they became very serious; not due to fear of their elders but out of fear of losing Kṛṣṇa’s company. Therefore, they gathered in one group. One gopī, not wanting to ruin the flower ornament Kṛṣṇa had made for her, remained on the dry shores of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The other doe-eyed damsels lovingly tried to pull her into the water. She resisted and the gopīs combined to splash her with laughter and lots of water from their cupped hands. As their beauty increased, the gopīs gorgeous faces made friends with the lotuses, their breasts made friends with the cakravāka birds and their navels made friends with the whirlpools in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The gopīs held hands with each other to form a golden net. They surrounded Kṛṣṇa with their golden net, just as the moonlight surrounds the clouds. Caught in their net, Kṛṣṇa induced the dancer of His glance to dance. By this Kṛṣṇa conquered the gopīs’ eyes and broke their net with a huge wave of water. The gopīs drew closer to Kṛṣṇa and dumped loads of water over His head. Kṛṣṇa blissfully covered His eyes to tolerate the downpour. Mādhava then retaliated by drenching the gopīs with torrents of water. The gopīs became momentarily stunned. Their blissful faces, however, remained as effulgent as the orb of the full moon. Suddenly Rādhikā started splashing Śyāma with water from Her lotus bud hands. The sound of Rādhā’s jeweled bangles, jingling like the water weapon of Cupid, was intolerable for Kṛṣṇa who desired victory in the water fight. Rādhā, using Her cupped hands like a water-bearing cloud, took great pleasure in completely soaking Kṛṣṇa with thick streams of water. As the glittering water continually cascaded upon Kṛṣṇa’s chest, it appeared that He was being pierced by the irresistible power of Cupid’s flower arrows. Kṛṣṇa’s flower garland and pearl necklace broke apart; only His Kaustubha withstood defeat. Kṛṣṇa boasted before Rādhā, “Now see if You can bear My water barrage!” Śyāma laughed lovingly before sousing Kiśorī’s face with water. Restless-eyed Rādhā was afflicted by Kṛṣṇa’s splashing, but She easily tolerated it by covering Her eyes with Her lotus hands. The resolution of a lover is so astonishing! Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.136-151 Madhusūdana drank the nectar of the gopīs’ lotus faces as they showered Him with the arrows of their glances. Kṛṣṇa tore off the gopīs’ ornaments. The commotion caused by the jingling ornaments and the sakhīs’ screams made the kekī and other birds warble fearfully. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 14.40 The gopīs radiated an indescribable erotic sweetness after Kṛṣṇa stole their blouses and veils. They

/Q: felt shy, however, so they used their hands to cover their exposed breasts, scratched by Kṛṣṇa’s fingernails. Locks of wet hair clung to their faces. The gopīs stood in the water among the clusters of lotus flowers with their arms locked across their breasts. It appeared that the countless soldiers in Cupid’s army had bound up many exalted moons with the terrifying ropes of Cupid. The gopīs approached Nāndīmukhī and complained with choked voices. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 14.43-44 The intoxicated elephants of Kṛṣṇa’s eyes bathed in a river of delight admiring the gorgeous bodies of the gopīs shining through their thin wet clothes. Similarly, the female elephants of the gopīs’ eyes submerged in the nectar stream flowing from Śyāma’s enticing form shimmering under His wet garments. Rādhā-kuṇḍa became scented with flower pollen and honey oozing from the pink, red, white and blue lotus flowers, water lilies and night blooming lotuses. Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs accelerated their already enthusiastic battle of water splashing. The gopīs gently sprinkled Kṛṣṇa, who responded by vigorously splashing them. The gopīs retaliated with a ferocious, constant volley of water from all directions that made Kṛṣṇa bow His head in fear and cover His eyes, nose and ears with His flower-petal fingers. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.50-55 Rādhā slipped away during all the commotion and hid Herself amidst a cluster of golden lotus flowers. Kṛṣṇa searched eagerly for Rādhā. He kissed yellow lotus after lotus, mistaking them for Her face. Rādhā and Her sakhīs broke out in uncontrollable laughter. Kṛṣṇa detected Rādhā’s hiding place and immediately approached Her. Vrṇdāvana-mahimāmṛtam 3.36 The constant splashing of Rādhā and Her sakhīs forced Kṛṣṇa, the crest-jewel of lovers, to lower His head and say, “Stop, Stop! I am defeated.” Rādhā, accepting Śyāma’s surrender, stopped spraying Him and burst into laughter. Vrṇdāvana-mahimāmṛtam 5.4 One sakhī said, “O Rādhā! There is no need to splash Kṛṣṇa anymore since He has admitted defeat. The flower garland on His head is hiding amidst His dark hair out of fear. The water has washed off His mineral powder designs and the bees have rejected His fallen flower garland. The glowing rays of Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha gem now reflect on Your cheeks.” Stava-mālā, gītāvalī 42 Lalitā said, “O Rādhā! Stop fighting now! Just see how Kṛṣṇa’s topknot is undone, His tilaka has rubbed off, His earrings are shaking and His garland is torn to shreds. The reflection of Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha jewel has taken shelter of Your cheeks. O sakhī! Don’t torture Kṛṣṇa anymore!” Govinda- līlāmṛta 15.68 The touch of Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs increased the natural fragrance and coolness of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The water became tinted with different colors from the black musk, yellow sandalwood paste and red kuṅkuma falling off their divine bodies. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.91 As the water war died down, the bliss of love awoke. The graceful lotus-eyed gopīs initiated the battle of lotuses. The sakhīs plucked the unfading lotuses and handed them to Rādhā. Raising Her arm over Her head to reveal the lower curve of Her breasts, Rādhā bombarded Kṛṣṇa’s chest with a volley of lotus flowers. Kṛṣṇa caught all of Rādhā’s flowers, laughed blissfully and fired them back at Her. The lotuses became both lusty and attractive due to being thrown back and forth and associating with Rādhā-Śyāma’s lotus hands. It seemed that a shuttle was weaving a huge golden cloth of prema. The back and forth movement of the bees pursuing the fragrant flowers resembled the arrows of the Divine Couple’s glances. The creepers of Rādhā’s arms wilted, Her chest heaved with Her deep breaths and

/Q: Her eyes rolled lazily; yet Her thirst for sport increased more and more. When a bee forsake the lotus to land on Rādhā’s lotus face and a school of śapharī fish took shelter of Her feet, Rādhā startled and fearfully embraced Her lover’s chest. The sakhīs, abandoning all fear, surrounded Rādhā-Mādhava. They raised their arms and laughed loudly while tossing lots of lotuses on the Divine Couple. Rādhā-Mādhava chuckled happily while holding lotus leaves above Their heads to ward off the barrage of flowers. What should the sakhīs do now that their leader Rādhā had given up the fight? The water birds on Kṛṣṇa’s side spread their wings and began to dance. Rādhā was standing up to Her breasts in deep water. Two cakravāka birds, seeing Her breasts resting on the surface of the water, approached Her, mistaking Her breasts to be their own species. Kṛṣṇa relished the amusing sight and then tried to touch those two birds. Rādhā quickly covered Her breasts with Her crossed arms. Kṛṣṇa then wrapped two thick lotus stems (His arms) around Rādhā’s neck, which made Rādhā’s creeper-like arms erupt in goose bumps. See the glory of prema! Kṛṣṇa said to Rādhā, “O sakhī! Your friends should surround Me and You should stand here without moving. I will dive under the water and then all of you try to find and hold Me.” Rādhā orderd the sakhīs to take up positions around Kṛṣṇa, who quickly dipped under the water. The gopīs extended their arms like a luminous circular net to search for Kṛṣṇa. The sakhīs moved toward Rādhā while gradually decreasing the diameter of their circle. They joyfully crowded together next to Rādhā and agitated the water by forcefully moving their delicate hands. They could not find Kṛṣṇa, however, so they just stood there giggling. Rādhā asked, “Who among you let that mischievous one escape?” The sakhīs defended themselves one after another saying, “I did not let Him get by! I think Kṛṣṇa fled out of fear of You.” “O sakhī Rādhā! You must certainly know Kṛṣṇa’s whereabouts. What can we know about Your fleeing lover. We see the fresh marks of amorous affairs on Your lovely body. Why are You hiding something from us, who depend on You alone?” Rādhā relished the gopīs’ jokes for a few moments. Then Rādhikā became uneasy and worried due to separation from Her lover. Casting sidelong glances here and there, Rādhā vainly searched for Śyāma. The humming of a swarm of bees revealed that playful, happy Kṛṣṇa was hiding among the water lilies. The sakhīs, fearing that Kṛṣṇa might escape again, formed a tight circle and quickly closed in on Kṛṣṇa. This time the gopīs, like generals in the battle of love, savored the taste of victory. Kṛṣṇa, with His attractive lotus eyes, glanced affectionately at the gopīs to satisfy their hearts with a honey sweet flow of mercy. Kṛṣṇa asked nonchalantly, “Why have you surrounded Me as I played alone in the cluster of lotuses? I have already been defeated. Do you have no shame? Do want to compete in water splashing again?” The gopīs, smiling slightly, angrily replied to Kṛṣṇa’s sweet but scolding words: “You ran away from the battle of lotuses and hid Yourself among the blue lotus flowers. You submerged in the water for a minute and then escaped by deceit. What about You, don’t You have any shame?” Rādhā said, “Who should know about Kṛṣṇa’s defeat? Indeed, to whom should one tell? It is not suitable to tell to just anyone. Śyāma, therefore, has gone to the water lilies to tell them of His defeat at your hands. Kṛṣṇa was alone and you were many, so it is natural that He lost.” Kṛṣṇa, amused with Rādhā’s words, replied, “O beautiful one! Come here! Only You have supported

/Q: Me and know My heart. The opposing side is blind to My intentions, therefore, I will worship You alone.” Kṛṣṇa happily adorned Rādhā’s ears with lotus seed husks. He designed a stylish hair ornament for Rādhā from the best of leaves and flower petals. Kṛṣṇa used lotus pollen powder to draw many intricate designs on Rādhā’s breasts to intimate His heart’s desires. He fashioned a jeweled belt from śaivala plants and a necklace from water lily stems. Kṛṣṇa beautified Kiśorī’s cheeks with colored lotus pollen. The gopīs celebrated their victory by taking water in one hand and striking it with the other to imitate the sounds of frogs. Witness the greatness of Kṛṣṇa’s water sports! A person becomes qualified for liberation by transcending the three guṇas, material bondage and attachment (rāga), contamination (lepa), passion (becoming nirañjana) and by remaining silent. Similarly, the gopīs’ necklaces became unstrung (without guṇas), their hair braids loosened (free from bondage) and the color (rāga) of their lips faded. The cosmetics (anulepa) on their breasts washed away, the mascara (añjana) vanished from their eyes and their bangles fell silent. Their belts became loose (mukta). In this way, Kṛṣṇa liberated the Vraja-gopīs by His blissful waters sports. The gopīs, feeling too shy to get undressed, just stood on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in their thin white bathing clothes. As the water dripped off their clothes, it appeared that their pitiable bodies were weeping tears. The gopīs’ tired bodies looked pale and their weary bloodshot eyes resembled red lotuses. Kṛṣṇa’s curious eyes thoroughly relished the attractive combination. Meanwhile, the sakhīs in the water, forgetting all the difficulties incurred during their playing, lovingly performed a splendid avabhṛtya bath [a ritual bath after a ceremony] to conclude the water pastimes of Rādhā-Śyāma. The gopīs, tired and soaked in perspiration, enhanced the beauty of Rādhā-Mādhava by sprinkling Them with water from their graceful lotus-bud hands, jingling with bracelets. The gorgeous gopīs quickly bathed Rādhā-Mādhava. The Divine Couple looked like a pair of elephants covered with shimmering water, soft lotus pollen, lotus petals, stamens and stalks. The gopīs cleansed Rādhā- Mādhava’s hair with scented oil and perfumes and then rubbed Their limbs. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.152-199 The mañjarīs massaged Hari and His sweethearts with aromatic herbal oils, anointed them with cleansing powders and happily bathed them in Rādhā-kuṇḍa.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.93
-L: Dressing at the lotus pavilion
/Q: The gopīs came out of the water and stood on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. The water dripping from the white garments of the golden-limbed gopīs looked like rain falling from white clouds hovering over a golden mountain. The drops of water falling from their loosened hair resembled strands of pearls, which glowed within Kṛṣṇa’s heart like His own pearl necklace. While standing there, the gopīs thought, “How amazing! Kṛṣṇa’s darśana is rarely attainable even in dreams. Yet today we are enjoying it without any hindrance.” The doe-eyed gopīs drank the sweet nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s darśana for a long time. Surprisingly though, their thirst for it doubled as they continually gazed upon their beloved. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.94-96 The mañjarīs dried Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs’ bodies and wet hair with soft towels and dressed them.

/Q: Everyone proceeded to the lotus temple in Ranga-devi’s kuñja in the southwest corner of Rādhā- kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa sat on a platform in the southern part of the bower, and Rādhā decorated Him with skillfully fashioned flower ornaments. Rādhikā dried and perfumed Kṛṣṇa’s hair with aguru smoke. She carefully combed and bound it with a mallikā garland. Rādhā expertly placed clusters of yātī, raṅgaṇa, yūthikā, bakula, golden yūthikā, leaves, ketakī petals, campaka and peacock feathers in Kṛṣṇa’s wavy locks. Rādhikā beautified Kṛṣṇa’s temples with strands of guñja seeds and pearls. Rādhā tied Kṛṣṇa’s hair in a topknot, which was broad at its base and narrow at its pinnacle. Rādhikā wrapped Kṛṣṇa’s topknot, which resembled a world captivating cāmara whisk, with flower garlands and topped it with an iridescent peacock feather, which attracted swarms of bumblebees. The bumblebee eyes of the gopīs got stuck on Kṛṣṇa’s charming topknot, which remains forever enshrined on the lotus of their hearts. Kṛṣṇa Himself became enchanted whenever He saw the mere shadow of the crest, whose sweet splendor fascinated the entire universe. Lalitā painted tilaka on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead, beginning with a moon spot of red kuṅkuma having a dot of black musk in its center. She circled it with smaller dots of sandalwood paste. The wonderful tilaka appeared like Cupid’s golden disc for piercing the gopīs’ hearts. Citrā-sakhī painted Kṛṣṇa’s body with artistic designs drawn in kuṅkuma. The continuous waves of beauty created by these markings agitated Citrā’s mind with memories of the sakhīs’ dancing with Kṛṣṇa in rāsa-līlā. Citrā, illumined by her feelings of pure friendship for Kṛṣṇa, drew many colorful pictures on His body that eclipsed the luster of a new monsoon cloud. The pictures resembled a snare spread by the hunter named Cupid to trap the wagtail birds of Rādhikā’s restless eyes. The gopīs jubilantly decorated their lover Kṛṣṇa with earrings, necklaces, bracelets, armlets, a waist belt and splendid anklets made of fragrant multi-colored flower buds, blossoms and leaves. Kṛṣṇa’s flower outfit acted like Cupid’s noose to bind the does of the gopīs’ eyes. According to the season, the principal gopīs decorated Rādhā in different combinations of matching flowers. Afterwards, the attendant mañjarīs of the gopīs tastefully dressed them. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.99-108 The mañjarīs, endowed with jewel-like attributes, enhanced the stunning beauty of Rādhā’s limbs with many ornaments made of aśoka, vāṇa, mallikā, śirīṣa, marubaka, lotus and kunda flowers whose natural beauty surpassed the opulence of costly jewels. The Vraja-gopīs, with bewitching eyes and highly perfumed bodies, were dressed so attractively in fine cloth and flowers that they appeared as the embodiments of the pure fame of Cupid. Colorful sāris covered the splendid thighs of the beautiful-eyed gopīs with golden complexions. The gopīs’ thighs covered by their sāris looked like strong pillars hosting flags at the entrance of Cupid’s city. As the gopīs wrapped their dark hair in scented white towels to dry, it appeared that dense darkness was drinking moonlight. Some gopīs retied their braids after drying their hair. While holding mirrors in their right hands, the gopīs used their left hands to replace the scattered locks that had fallen over their foreheads. The dressing place seemed to be the capital of Cupid. One sakhī untied her cleansed hair, combed it and anointed her body with a thick layer of saffron and sandalwood paste. Other gopīs sprinkled their bodies with sandalwood mixed with saffron, musk and camphor, which looked like liquefied moonbeams. Some gopīs thought their bodies were beautiful enough even without ornaments, so they simply dressed themselves and applied some makeup. One sakhī considered that cosmetics hindered Hari’s touch so she rejected them. One sakhī, thinking that her

/Q: attractive eyes alone enhanced the beauty of her ears, did not hang blue lotus ornaments on her ears. One sakhī looked superb with her unbound hair. Yet to display her artistry she had her mañjarīs skillfully tie it up. One sakhī, thinking her glistening spotless golden limbs were better than mirrors, coquettishly looked at her limbs to see her own reflection. Caitanya-carita 10.16-25 After dressing each other, the sakhīs happily approached Kṛṣṇa.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.206
-L: Forest lunch
/Q: A group of doe-eyed sakhīs named Kaumudī, Kumudinī, Kumudvatī, Śitalā, Śaśikalā, Kalāvatī, Rūpa- mañjarī, Anaṅga-mañjarī, Keli-mañjarī and Aśoka-mañjarī, who were expert in making picnic lunches, met Vṛndā and her vana-devīs to arrange a forest feast for the pleasure of Rādhā-Mādhava. They brought fine quality, soft white rice. All the cooked grains were separate from each other as if they were enemies. The fragrant ghee and pure buttermilk sprinkled on the rice enhanced its attraction. Though all the items had been packed in new earthen pots and brought from their homes early in the morning, they appeared spotlessly pure and fresh. The sakhīs arranged loads of excellent, nourishing yogurt, rivaling the moon in coolness and camphor in whiteness. The sweetness of the yogurt surpassed the ocean of nectar. Vṛndā and her companions supplied emerald green palāśa leaf cups to hold the sweet succulent pomegranate juice; the ambrosial tāla fruit nectar; the white coconut pulp shining like the moon; the tender bījapūra; the tāla fruit pulp, which was as soft as cotton, various roots and sprouts; the peeled lotus seeds; fat, oily kaśeru; tangerine and sweet pīlu fruits; slices of tasty, juicy ripe mango; firm and fragrant sweet grapes; fresh mung sprouts with salt and ginger to give a zesty taste and bowls of juicy sugar cane pieces. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.213-223 Kṛṣṇa sat on an eating āsana of white flowers covered with a white cloth. Subala and Madhumaṅgala sat on Kṛṣṇa’s left and right. Rādhā and the sakhīs sat opposite Kṛṣṇa in order to serve the items brought by Vṛndā. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15. 1- 12 The crystal glasses and decanters full of mango juice filled the air with a sweet fragrance. Cooling drinks prepared from camphor, pepper and ample sugar awaited Kṛṣṇa’s tongue. Piles of coconut pulp cut in conch shaped pieces sat on the table. The pulp was covered with a damp cloth to preserve its sweetness and fragrance. Rādhā deftly picked up a little of each sweet, fragrant item and put it in Kṛṣṇa’s hand while smiling. Rādhā, handling an excellent knife, expertly cut a mango and blissfully offered the pieces to Her beloved’s lotus hand. Rādhā squeezed the juice from the choicest mangos and offered it to Kṛṣṇa in a golden cup. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.224-229 Rādhikā served Her home-made cream sweets made to look like slices of orange, mango and rucaka ornaments. Some sweets had the shape of flower and fruit bearing trees like bilva, pomegranate, mango, orange and coconut. The gopīs gladly served Rādhā’s laḍdus named candrakānti and gaṅgājala, which satiated Śyāma’s five senses. The sakhīs distributed nectar drinks of mango and jackfruit mixed with honey, sugar and camphor as well as karpūrakeli and amṛtakeli. Kṛṣṇa, Subala and Madhumaṅgala thoroughly relished all the delicious items served by Rādhārāṇī, whose face beamed with joy while feeding Her sweetheart. Madhumaṅgala made the sakhīs laugh by contorting his face with disgust over one item, or praising another by showing a silly smile of appreciation.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.127-134

/Q: Kṛṣṇa energetically ate whatever Rādhā’s beautiful hands presented. Śyāmasundara, His lotus face and eyes shining with joy, finished His forest picnic and performed ācamana. Kṛṣṇa filled His mouth with excellent scented spices mixed with camphor, and then relaxed for a few moments on a jeweled platform beneath a tree near the entrance of a kuñja. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.230-232 Tulasī offered betel nuts to Hari as He reclined on a splendid flowerbed in the lotus temple. Her friends massaged Mādhava’s feet, fanned Him with cāmaras and rendered other pleasing services. Madhumaṅgala and Subala, while chewing pān, strolled over to the southern wing of the lotus temple to rest on two pleasant flowerbeds. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.136-137 The gopīs’ hearts trembled in anticipation of honoring Śyāma’s sweet remnants. They said, “First our leader Rādhā should eat and afterwards we will eat separately.” Rādhā, knowing their minds, said, “O faithful Vṛndā! We shall all eat together! Distribute Kṛṣṇa’s remnants equally among all the sakhīs. I cannot do anything without all of you, what to speak of eating.” The sakhīs sat in a circle. Vṛndā served Rādhā first and then the sakhīs one by one, inducing every sakhī to relish Kṛṣṇa’s prasādam. While eating Kṛṣṇa’s remnants, everyone realized that the food had become exceedingly tasty due to the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s lips. Rādhā and Her sakhīs, enjoying the bliss of eating together, gradually finished all the items. They washed their mouths and chewed some delicious camphor-scented tāmbūla. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.233-238 The sakhīs retired to the sleeping chamber in the lotus temple. Rādhā lounged on a flowerbed and the sakhīs sat around Her. Tulasī gave Kṛṣṇa’s tāmbūla remnants to Rādhā and Her sakhīs, and fresh betel-nuts to Nāndīmukhī, Dhaniṣṭhā and Kundalatā. Vṛndā, Tulasī and Rūpa-mañjarī took prasādam with the other mañjarīs. Nāndīmukhī and others sipped ācamana, and took rest in the eastern wing of the lotus temple. Rādhā offered Her betel remnants to Rūpa-mañjarī and some separate betel to Vṛndā and other mañjarīs as they left. Kṛṣṇa smiled while pulling shy Rādhā towards Him. Śyāma passed His tāmbūla into Rādhā’s mouth by kissing her, and lay down beside Her on the flower bed. Rūpa and other chief mañjarīs fanned Rādhā-Mādhava with cāmaras until They slipped into a blissful slumber.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.140- 146
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (2:24 p.m.—2:48 p.m.)
-L: The parrot’s glorify Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form
/Q: Subala, Madhumaṅgala and the gopīs finished their brief nap and went to see Rādhā-Govinda, who were awake and sitting on the flower bed. Vṛndā-devī came in with two of her best-trained parrots; a female named Kalokti and a male named Mañjuvāk. The parrots humbly exclaimed, “O Vṛndāvaneśvara and Vṛndāvaneśvari! All glories unto You! Be pleased with us!” Vṛndā, following Rādhā’s eye gesture, ordered the parrot to recite, which he did for the pleasure of the assembled sakhīs. The male parrot said, “My poetry is not very sweet or highly ornamented, however, the saints will relish it because it glorifies Govinda. It is just like the lowly iron knife of the hunter, which turns to gold upon contacting a touchstone, and then becomes suitable for decorating a great person.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.1-5

/Q: “O Lord! Cupid of Vṛndāvana! Glory to You! Your dear most gopī is a celestial goddess and You are the crest jewel of all. The honey of Your lotus feet is sweeter than streams of bliss and knowledge. O Govinda! I offer repeated respects to Your great form, the seed of all universes. Ānanda-vṛndāvana- campū 5.12 “Kṛṣṇa! Your handsome complexion is the color of a blue sapphire, eyeliner, a mass of rain clouds or a fresh blue lotus. Your curly locks shine jet black and You sport a colorful peacock feather in Your top knot. Desire tree flower ornaments, surrounded by buzzing bees, adorn Your gorgeous form. Newly unfurled flower petals grace Your ears. Yellow gorocana tilaka shines on Your forehead amidst strands of restless locks. Your two supple arms move like creepers swaying in a gentle breeze. “Your beautiful face resembles a spotless autumn moon. Your wide eyes taper like lotus petals. The mirrors of Your cheeks reflect Your jeweled makara earrings. Your aristocratic nose rises attractively. Your lips are redder than vermilion. Your nails are rows of full moons. Your beautiful face is illuminated by Your smile, which is more brilliant than kunda or mandāra flowers. Flower necklaces beautify Your shapely neck. “An aromatic celestial flower garland attended by intoxicated bees hangs from Your lion-like shoulders to Your lotus feet. The mark of Śrīvatsa distinguishes You from all others. Your long arms, extending to Your knees, are stout and well-rounded. Your abdomen is rippled, Your navel is deep, and the thin line of hair rising from Your navel resembles a line of sleeping bees. “Kṛṣṇa, You wear jeweled armlets, bracelets, rings, necklaces, anklets, a gem-studded cummerbund and shimmering yellow cloth around Your waist. Various colored cosmetics enhance Your natural beauty. You have full thighs, calves and attractive knees. Your ankles resemble the shells of turtles. Your toenails shame the gleam of ruby mirrors and illumine Your many toe rings. “Your pinkish foot soles display the auspicious marks of a fish, goad, cakra, conch, flag, barley corn, lotus and thunderbolt. Your incomparably graceful bodily limbs completely defeat the beauty of Cupid. O Kṛṣṇa! You are a fathomless ocean of joy. The mellow music rising from Your flute, played by Your lotus mouth and dancing fingers, attracts all living entities and melts their hearts.” Krama- dīpikā 3.7-16 “I offer my respects to the son of Vraja’s king, who forever sports with Rādhikā.” The female parrot said, “When will we smell Kṛṣṇa’s sweet lotus face framed by glossy wavy locks of dark hair swaying gently over His forehead? Kṛṣṇa’s long curving eyebrows move seductively on His forehead and His nose is beautifully raised. When an object falls into an ocean of sweetness, it also manifests sweetness. Similarly, the yellow cow binding rope draped on Śyāma’s turban has assumed a wonderful sweetness by contacting His blissful form. “Moreover, the damsels of Vraja have become supremely fortunate by worshiping Kṛṣṇa’s tāmbūla scented lips bordered by His cheeks. Kṛṣṇa’s dancing makara kuṇḍala (dolphin earrings), studded with jewels and flowers, cast marvelous reflections on His cheeks, which sparkle like bubbles of blue water. What woman would not crave to cuddle Kṛṣṇa’s broad chest, adorned with glowing necklaces, a fragrant forest garland, the Kaustubha gem, Śrīvatsa and the golden line of Lakṣmī? “Whose lake of the heart would not swirl in waves upon seeing Kṛṣṇa’s long arms hanging at His sides like the trunks of a pair of intoxicated baby elephants? It appears that Kṛṣṇa’s arms are trying to snatch the nectar beauty of His knees. Within our hearts, we tightly grasp Kṛṣṇa’s thin waist, which is

/Q: surrounded by three graceful folds of skin. Although Kṛṣṇa’s attractive waist is as slender as a fist, it is exceedingly powerful and makes us very weak. “The line of black hair rising from Kṛṣṇa’s navel to His chest looks like a row of splendid kalpa- vṛkṣa trees. The hair resembles the fine hair on a bee’s back, or a black snake that bites our chests when we tightly embrace Him. Kṛṣṇa’s elegant feet, marked with a goad, flag, lotus and thunderbolt, defeat the beauty of red lotus flowers. Śyāma’s toes sparkle in the light of His jeweled in-laid anklets. When will Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet be the ornament on our breasts?” Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.66-73 The male parrot said, “May Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, marked with the signs of the Lord such as a cakra, half-moon, barley corn, hexagon, pot, umbrella, triangle, sky, bow, svastika, thunderbolt, cow’s hoof print, conch, fish, goad, lotus, flag, jambu fruit and an upward line remain ever supreme. Govinda- līlāmṛta 16.6 “I offer my respects to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, which are bound in friendship’s constant embrace to the breasts of the Vraja-gopīs, and permanently stained with their fine bodily ointments. The radiant pink color of Kṛṣṇa’s foot soles comes from the kuṅkuma anointing the upper portion of the gopīs’ breasts. The dark blue color of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet originates from the musk spread on the lower part of the gopīs’ breasts. The waves of light emanating from Kṛṣṇa’s moonlike toenails come from the sandalwood paste covering the middle portion of their breasts. “May the two lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Pūtana, always protect us. His delicate toes resemble the petals of a pink lotus flower and His slender ankles resemble the stalk of a lotus. His lotus feet hold the honey of His devotees’ faith. The streams of light radiating from Kṛṣṇa’s toenails resemble the stamens of a lotus. The kuṅkuma powder from the budding breasts of Rādhikā, which clings to Kṛṣṇa’s foot soles, appears like the pollen of a lotus flower. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.1-2 “May the brilliant light from Kṛṣṇa’s toenails protect us! The cakorī birds, thinking that light to be moonbeams, come to lick Kṛṣṇa’s footsteps. That light turns all jeweled foot pedestals to colorless crystal. That light seems to be thousands of water drops emanating from washing the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya-candrodaya 7.12 “Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet are more cooling, beautiful and fragrant than the moon, camphor, sandalwood, lotus stems and a blue lotus flower. They are always eager to touch Rādhā’s breasts or be fondled by Her tender hands. Kṛṣṇa’s lovely feet become the playground of beauty personified when they are smeared with the kuṅkuma from Rādhā’s firm breasts. May we always have the opportunity to glorify Kṛṣṇa’s charming lotus feet. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.18 “Kṛṣṇa’s smooth rounded ankles are like the tips of blue lotus flowers protruding from the beautiful waves of the Yamunā. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.20 “Hari’s thighs assail the pride of the emerald trunks of banana trees, which support the creator’s universal abode. They are blue sapphire pillars for tying the baby elephants of the gorgeous Vraja- gopīs’ minds. May Kṛṣṇa’s thighs destroy all our sins! Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.25 “Kṛṣṇa’s sturdy knees are the sitting place of the goddess of sweetness, or two strong joints in the creeper of charm, or two treasure chests for storing the wealth of the goddess of elegance. Kṛṣṇa’s knees are two sapphire jewel boxes holding the cintāmaṇi gems of the Vraja-gopīs’ minds. Kṛṣṇa’s firm glossy thighs, which taper slightly as they descend to His knees, are the stage for Cupid’s best dancers. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the eternal abode of divine grace, always shine within our hearts. Govinda-

/Q: līlāmṛta 16.28-30 “Hari’s thighs tear apart the banana trees’ pride in their own beauty. The firmness of Hari’s thighs crushes the mad elephants’ pride in the elegance of their trunks. Rādhikā always fondles Kṛṣṇa’s thighs. To what may poets compare the incomparably good-looking thighs of Śrī Kṛṣṇa? “Kṛṣṇa’s derriere is firm, broad and beautiful. It is the rāsa-sthalī for billions of Cupids and Ratīs (Cupid’s wives). The cultured patience of the cowherds’ wives is shattered to pieces by their hankering to behold Kṛṣṇa’s handsome derriere. From His waist up Kṛṣṇa’s body looks like a new tamāla tree. Hari’s hips are a blue sapphire dam holding back a vast reservoir of sweet beauty. Śyāma’s waist bells are swans singing and playing there. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.34-36 “When the lions saw Kṛṣṇa’s attractive thin waist, they feared that their own waists would no longer appear glorious in comparison. Out of embarrassment, they fled to inacessible Himālayan caves. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.44 “Kṛṣṇa’s navel is the honey-filled hollow of a dark tamāla desire-tree wherein the greedy bumblebee eyes of the gopīs immerse themselves in the nectar and never come out. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.46 “The playful young bees of the gopīs’ eyes get intoxicated by drinking the honey from the deep lotus navel of Kṛṣṇa. Incapable of flying, they fall asleep on the lotus petal of Kṛṣṇa’s belly to form His romāvali (thin line of hair from the navel to chest). Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.49 “A stream of śṛṅgāra-rasa (erotic love) flows down the mountain of Kṛṣṇa’s chest into the lake of His navel as a line of fine black hair (romāvali). Kṛṣṇa’s belly is raised at the sides and slightly lowered in the center. May Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful belly forever illuminate my mind! “The divine lake of Kṛṣṇa’s belly is the summit of magnificence! The three folds of skin at Kṛṣṇa’s sides are small waves in that lake. The hair on Kṛṣṇa’s belly is the moss growing on it and the bees that frequent the lake. Kṛṣṇa’s waist bells are warbling cranes on the shores of that lake. His navel is a lotus flower growing in its waters. The minnow-like eyes and swan-like mind of Rādhikā always play in that transcendental lake. “The golden line of Lakṣmī marks the left side of Kṛṣṇa’s chest, Śrīvatsa rules the right side and the dazzling Kaustubha jewel hangs below Kṛṣṇa’s neck, illuminating His chest, which is beautified with many colorful aromatic garlands. Kṛṣṇa’s broad chest is a blue sapphire throne for the Queen of Rādhā’s mind. It incites lust in the hearts of the Vraja-gopīs, and its sweetness enchants all the young girls in the three worlds. Kṛṣṇa’s pearl necklace is the Gaṅgā, His ruby necklace—the reddish Sarasvatī and His dark bodily hair—the Yamunā. I offer my obeisances to Kṛṣṇa’s chest, which resembles the Triveni at Prayāga because it grants auspiciousness to the people of the three worlds merely by its touch. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.52-57 “May the long, strong, graceful and charmingly round arms of Kṛṣṇa appear in my heart! Lakṣmī and all other beautiful women in the universe covet them. They are the heart’s treasure for the beautiful swollen breasts of the Vraja-gopīs. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.63 “I remember Kṛṣṇa’s arms, like jeweled pillars supporting the swing which moves the Vraja-gopīs’ hearts in the festival of love. Kṛṣṇa’s long arms are the towering columns of the victory gate announcing Rādhā’s defeat in the battle of Eros. They are stakes at the great sacrifice for defeating the demons, or trunks of the elephants called sweetness and conjugal love. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 8.46 “Kṛṣṇa’s handsome palms splendidly shine with nineteen signs, including a conch, crescent moon,

/Q: barley corn, goad, wheel, club, umbrella, flag, svastika, pillar, lotus, sword, plough, bow, lance, bilva tree, fish, arrow and cakras on each fingertip. These unique marks indicate that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Poets say Kṛṣṇa’s palms are soft and gentle because He is the Supreme. Others claim His hands are very hard and strong because He is God. Both statements are true. I believe that Śyāma’s hands became firm from massaging the breasts of the gopīs, which are harder than turtle shells. “Vṛndāvanacandra’s hands are like medicinal leaves that remove the fever in the gopīs’ breasts caused by Cupid’s arrows. They are blue lotus flowers decorating the golden vases of Rādhā’s full breasts. Poets compare Kṛṣṇa’s hands to blue lotuses (top) joined with red lotuses (palms). Kṛṣṇa’s fingers are a row of lotus petals. Kṛṣṇa’s fingernails are a series of full moons or the pointed, glistening goads of Cupid. “Poets say Kṛṣṇa’s supremacy is indicated by His raised shoulders, which defeat the high humps on a bull’s back. I believe they rose in ecstasy from touching the lotus stem arms of Rādhā. Hari’s shoulders rose up when He eagerly extended His neck to view the sweet beauty of His Kaustubha gem. “Kṛṣṇa’s broad stout back gradually tapers to His slender waist, which is like a charming current in a flood of transcendental delight. The monarch of sweetness sits on the blue sapphire throne of Hari’s back. Kṛṣṇa’s back is the object of worship for the doe-eyed damsels of Vraja, who ever yearn to stroke it. May I always glorify the marvelous back of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. “Mukunda’s attractive neck, which is broad at the base and tapers gradually upwards, shames the legend of the lion’s powerful neck. Mukunda’s neck is the stage for His curling locks to dance. The effulgence of Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha gem illuminates the blue conch shell of His neck, which excites the eyes everyone in the three worlds with its three lovely lines. “The melodic tone Śyāma’s voice mocks the humming of the bees, the cooing of the cuckoos, the song of the flute and the vibration of the vīṇā. Hari’s throat is a limitless lake of nectar in which the regal swan of His Kaustubha gem always cavorts. Innumerable rivers of charming jokes, beautiful poems and sweet songs continually flow in all directions from that divine lake. “All glories to the immaculate lotus flower of Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful face! Hari’s ears, cheeks, nose, lips, chin and jaws are the glistening petals of the lotus. Kṛṣṇa’s attractive teeth are its filaments and His tongue is the whorl of the lotus. Mādhava’s dark eyebrows are the female bees. The curling locks on Mādhava’s forehead are the male bees sitting on the lotus. “Kṛṣṇa’s restless eyes are two wagtail birds hovering above that splendid aromatic lotus. If Brahma had made the full moon without spots and added to it two bandhuka flowers (Kṛṣṇa’s lips), two mirrors (Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks), a row of kunda flowers (Kṛṣṇa’s teeth), two dancing wagtail birds (Kṛṣṇa’s eyes), a crescent moon (Kṛṣṇa’s forehead), a sesame flower (Kṛṣṇa’s nose), Cupid’s bow (Kṛṣṇa’s eye brows) and a line of bees (Kṛṣṇa’s hair), then the best of poets could have compared Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful face with the full moon. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.67-79 “O Mukunda! The full moon of Your beautiful face radiates waves of nectar as Your charming smiles. That moon creates crashing waves in the ocean of the Vraja-gopīs’ conjugal bliss. It turns the candramaṇi (moonstones) jewels of Your devotees’ eyes into gushing streams of joyful tears. May the full moon of Your attractive face grant us the topmost happiness!
/R: Govinda-virudāvalī 56

/Q: “The full moon of Kṛṣṇa’s lovely face makes massive tidal waves in the ocean of the doe-eyed gopīs’ amorous desires. It delights the lotus flowers of the yogīs’ hearts and makes the demons mourn at night like cakravāka birds (who separate at night). May the blissful moon of Kṛṣṇa’s face bring you transcendental happiness! Jagannātha-vallabha 1.3 “Aha! Kṛṣṇa’s chin defeats the beauty of a blue lotus petal resting in the moon rays. It is slightly lower in the center and raised on both sides. Perhaps, Yaśodā made it that way by pressing Kṛṣṇa’s chin during His childhood. Kṛṣṇa’s charming chin is a flood of refined elegance. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.80-81 “Kṛṣṇa’s shapely ear lobes have become slightly elongated from the weight of His makara kuṇḍala (dolphin-shaped earrings). Mādhava’s nicely proportioned ears are Cupid’s net for catching the fish- like eyes of every pretty girl, Cupid’s snare to trap the doe-eyes of the gopīs, or Cupid’s noose to bind the wagtail birds of Rādhā’s eyes. Kṛṣṇa’s ears are ever eager to drink the nectar of Rādhikā’s proud teasing and crooked joking insults. “Kṛṣṇa’s ears look absolutely gorgeous with their enchanting shape and reddish hue inside. May the vision of Kṛṣṇa’s dignified, well-formed ears forever remain within my mind! Kṛṣṇa’s glowing cheeks resemble a pair of moons nourished to fullness by the ambrosial elixir of Rādhā’s kisses. Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks, the dancing stage for His swinging makara kuṇḍala, defeat the pride of blue sapphire mirrors. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.84-86 “Kṛṣṇa exhales through His slightly parted red lips, which defeat the beauty of the bandhūka flower. The summit of beauty is found where Kṛṣṇa’s slightly raised red upper lip meets the dark blue complexion of His lotus face. One will naturally forget all other attachments if he sees Kṛṣṇa’s lovely lips, which are glossier than red bimba fruits and have faint lines running through them. When Kṛṣṇa touches His flute with the nectar of His lips, it produces a bewitching melody that instantly steals the minds of everyone in the world. “Śyāma’s luscious lips are jewel boxes containing the entire wealth of the refined young damsels of Vraja. They are Rādhā’s life-giving nectar cups adorned with Her stunning teeth marks. I pray that Śyāma’s glossy red lips will forever shine in my heart! “A mere drop of the lustrous grandeur of Mukunda’s teeth mocks the brilliance of blooming white kunda flowers, sparkling diamonds, pearls and radiant rubies. The parrots of Kṛṣṇa’s teeth take pleasure in biting the bimba fruit [red cherry] lips of the beautiful eye-browed Vraja-gopīs. Kṛṣṇa’s teeth are tinted red like ripe pomegranate seeds from repeatedly relishing the honey nectar of Priyaji’s splendid red lips. Kṛṣṇa’s dignified teeth are Kāmadeva’s chisels for splitting the red rubies of Rādhā’s lovely lips. Fortunate devotees always meditate on the glories of Mukunda’s beautiful teeth. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.88-92 “O Mādhava! May my bliss increase unlimitedly by meditating upon the moonlight of Your smile, which destroys the darkness in the hearts of Your devotees, intensifies the love of Vraja-gopīs and defeats the sweetness of an ocean of nectar. Govinda-virudāvalī 19 “All glories to Kṛṣṇa’s sweet words. They are a rasālā drink prepared from the ghee of Śyāma’s sincere love, sweetened with His honey smile and sugary jokes and spiced with the camphor of metaphor, alliteration and other literary ornaments. The rasālā drink of Kṛṣṇa’s crooked speech is filled with double meanings, yet it delights the entire world, eclipses the pride of the ocean of nectar

/Q: and relieves the gopīs from the fiery pains of Cupid. “Kṛṣṇa’s elegant nose curves downward like the shapely beak of a parrot. It looks like a sapphire sesame flower or an arrow of Cupid made of sapphire. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.96-97 “May Kṛṣṇa’s elongated, love-glossed reddish eyes, with captivating fluttering eye lashes that roll about with the intoxication of youth, always appear in my mind. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.101 “Kṛṣṇa’s attractive eyes appear white like waves in the ocean of milk, red like a shower of red lotus petals and black like a swarm of bees whenever He casually opens and closes them upon seeing an amusing scene. Kṛṣṇa’s sidelong glances, shot from the Cupid’s bow of His raised eye brows, easily pierce the tough armor of pride of the noblest women. They are thunderbolts to shatter the hearts of all chaste young girls. May the arrows of Kṛṣṇa’s sidelong glances bring transcendental happiness to you all. Govinda-virudāvalī 13 “Kṛṣṇa’s seductive glances, sharper and harder than Cupid’s arrows, expertly break the firm vows of chastity of the maidens of Vraja. As the best of philanthropists, they fulfill the desires of the poverty stricken conditioned souls way beyond their dreams. The arrows of Murari’s dancing vine-like eyebrows not only pierce the restless deer-like minds of all the young girls in the universe, but they leave them spinning. Though they are crooked, Kṛṣṇa’s eyebrows are more famous than Cupid’s flower bow, which seems as insignificant as a blade of grass in comparison. Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.102-103 “I praise Śyāma’s forehead, which is shaped like the moon on its eighth waning day. Kṛṣṇa’s forehead bears resplendent saffron tilaka and colorful designs drawn in mineral pigments from Govardhana Hill. Cupid uses Kṛṣṇa’s forehead, with its border of curly locks and attractive creeper-like dark eyebrows, as a powerful trap to capture the doe of Rādhikā’s mind. “Kesava’s handsome hair seems like a net cast by the fisherman named Cupid to catch the minnow- like eyes of the Vraja-gopīs. Kṛṣṇa’s long, thick, curly, equally trimmed hair is glossier than a swarm of bees, more fragrant than a blue lotus dipped in musk, and more magnificent than a black cāmara or the flag of Cupid. Kṛṣṇa’s hair is sometimes tied in a top knot or braided beautifully, nicely parted in the center, hung in a ponytail, left half free and half bound or even half bound and half braided. In whatever way Śyāma styles it; His hair is like the deer mark on the full moon of Rādhikā’s heart. May we always remember Kesava’s beautiful curly locks! Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.106-108 “May Śyāmasundara, who has elongated reddish eyes, who delights everyone with His captivatingly beautiful form which is more charming than millions of Kāmadevas and who reigns supreme in Vṛndāvana, appear on the lotus of my heart. Padyāvalī 89 “May that cowherd boy, who is expert in the mellows of amorous love, who casts restless glances from the corners of His enticing eyes, whose splendrous cheeks are adorned with glittering, swinging dolphin-shaped earrings, and who is very eager to enjoy the rāsa dance with the beautiful damsels of Vraja, immediately appear within my heart. Padyāvalī 97 “Mādhava’s divine form is made of condensed eternity, knowledge and bliss. The bluish-black effulgence of Govinda’s body glistens like a mass of rain clouds. Śyāma’s radiant body, which is always disturbed by the tempting glances of the gopīs glowing from love’s exertion, is the abode of prema for the three worlds. May Kṛṣṇa’s incomparably divine form arise in my mind!
/R: Alaṅkāra- kaustubha 6.8

/Q: The parrot concluded, “What more can I say! Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body is a limitless ocean of sweet nectar showering bliss on the eyes of everyone. The beautiful limbs of Kṛṣṇa make His ornaments shine with more spendor. Even Lord Ananta, with his thousand mouths, cannot fully recount the unique elegance of Kṛṣṇa’s magnificent body.” The male and female parrots choked up in ecstasy and stopped speaking. The sakhīs, drowning in the nectar ocean of the parrots’ words, became briefly stunned in euphoria.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 16.109- 10
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (2:48 p.m.—3:12 p.m.)
-L: Parrots describe Kṛṣṇa’s divine qualities
/Q: Rādhā encouraged Vṛndā to fondle the male parrot in order to revitalize him. The parrots then praised Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities for the pleasure of the assembly. Mañjuvak, the male parrot, said, “Proficient poets and learned philosophers cannot fathom the limitless ocean of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities. Nevertheless, I, an insignificant bird, will now try to drink the entire ocean by licking it with my tongue. Perhaps I resemble a hungry parrot trying to peck through the impenetrable husk of a coconut. I may be shameless but I am determined to glorify Kṛṣṇa’s qualities. My desire is like trying to extend one’s hand to grasp the sun, to break Mount Sumeru with one’s head or to cross the ocean by swimming. “Anyone who has purified His tongue by describing a single nectarean drop of Hari’s divine attributes can never touch any other subject again. Once a cuckoo tastes the sweet mango bud, will it ever be attracted to bitter nimba fruits? When Kṛṣṇa, the moon of Gokula, was an infant, Gargācārya told about His supremely auspicious beauty, glory, profundity and other aspects of His infinite personality. The sage told Nanda Mahārāja that his child possessed qualities equal to those of Lord Nārāyaṇa Himself. “Kṛṣṇa, the annihilator of demons, has countless spiritual virtues, such as intense love for His devotees and submitting to the control of their love. Although devotees earnestly endeavor day and night to count Kṛṣṇa’s endless qualities, they cannot possibly count them all. The attraction of Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments increases when placed on His beautiful body which is always situated in the prime of youth (nitya-kaiśora). Govinda heroically held Govardhana Hill as if it were a toy ball. Kṛṣṇa’s spotless character and His spectacular pastimes fascinate the three worlds. Śyāma is so generous that He freely gives Himself to His devotees. Kṛṣṇa’s mercy floods the entire world with nectar and His fame purifies everything. Who can possibly describe the unique qualities of Govinda? “Kṛṣṇa’s wonderful body emits a fragrance of musk-scented blue lotus flowers. His hair, eyebrows, armpits and hips defeat the aroma of lotuses, pārijāta and aguru. The aroma of camphor-scented lotus flowers emanates from Śyāma’s face, eyes, nose, mouth, navel and feet. The nectar waves of Kṛṣṇa’s fragrant body flood the world in joy. Govinda-līlāmṛta 17.1-9 “Rādhikā once mistook Her reflection on Kṛṣṇa’s glossy chest to be a rival sakhī. Becoming jealous, Rādhikā trembled with anger and turned Her head away. In reality, Hari never pursues any other gopī because He is totally captivated by the unparalleled sweetness of Śrīmatī. Would a honeybee reject a cluster of sweet lotuses for a mere vine? “By nature the sun is hot, the moon—cool, the earth—forbearing, the ocean—deep and the wind—

/Q: restless. Devotees are peaceful and self-controlled by nature. And by nature Kṛṣṇa is controlled by prema. Kṛṣṇa is generally grave, steady, polite, modest, blissful, forgiving and unchanging. However, when Kṛṣṇa beholds Kiśorī’s lovely face, He succumbs to lust and wanders aimlessly under Her subjugation. Govinda-līlāmṛta 17.14-17 “How do the darling damsels of Vraja worship Kṛṣṇa? They offer padya (foot wash) with their perspiration, arghya (water for hands) with their horripilation, ācamana (mouth wash) with their love cries, gandha (scents) with their bodily fragrance, puṣpam (flowers) with their alluring smiles, naivedya (food) by offering the nectar of their embraces and other amorous recreations. They offer the tāmbūla (betel-nut packets) of their sweet lips. Various persons perceive Kṛṣṇa differently. Greedy materialists see Kṛṣṇa as a liberal philanthropist. Kṛṣṇa is the most merciful savior for the distressed. Śyāma is Cupid personified for the young gopīs. Kṛṣṇa is death for His enemies. Mādhava is the Supreme Lord for His surrendered devotees and the dearest friend of the Vrajavāsīs. Kṛṣṇa shows equal treatment to the śvapaco (dog-eater) and the brāhmaṇa. If a dog-eater becomes a devotee, he at once becomes a fully qualified brāhmaṇa. However, a brāhmaṇa averse to Kṛṣṇa immediately turns into a degraded dog-eater. Prema makes Kṛṣṇa’s intimate gopī lovers discard the poison of mortifying shame to relish the sweetest nectar of His association. Kṛṣṇa’s fame purifies the world and He attracts everyone to Him like a magnet. Mellow moonlight feels like fire in separation from Śyāma, and searing sunshine soothes like cooling nectar. I offer my respects to Kṛṣṇa who is endowed with unlimited transcendental attributes. Govinda-līlāmṛta 17.19-21 “All glories to Gokulacandra’s bewitching muralī! Its sweet song awakens lust within the gopīs with enticing lotus-eyes. It steals the treasury of their patience, removes their fear of public opinion, cuts the root of their pious chastity and forcibly pulls them off the laps of their jealous husbands. Moreover, its melodious music makes mobile objects freeze in ecstasy and immovable entities like trees and flowers flutter with love. Govinda-līlāmṛta 17.25 “The Vraja-gopīs, overcome with prema, once addressed Kṛṣṇa’s flute: ‘O dear sakhī! O cruel vaṁśī! In the guise of music, you are producing what appears to be a flood of nectar at one moment and a flood of poison in the next moment. It is simultaneously invigorating us and killing us. You are creating a mysterious condition within us that we can neither understand nor bear.’ Govinda-līlāmṛta 17.27 “Mādhava’s feet shame the legendary beauty of lotus flowers. Mukunda’s face is more radiant than the moon. Govinda’s delightful eyebrows appear like a line of bees. Kṛṣṇa’s charming lips are full of nectar. Gopīnātha’s lovely restless eyes resemble a pair of swaying lotus flowers. Śyāma’s equisite teeth gleam more brightly than jasmine flowers. Vrajamohan’s voice is sweeter than nectar and His smile is more soothing than moonlight. “Śyāma’s fingers look like delicate leaf buds and His fine fingernails shine like a line of full moons. His lustrous cheeks outclass polished mirrors. Śyāma’s glossy complexion surpasses the rich dark blue of a fresh rain cloud. When the gopīs’ thirsty bumblebee eyes behold Śyāma’s lotus face, they become eager to drink its nectar. “For saints, Mādhava is as soothing to the mind as moonshine. For His surrendered devotees Kṛṣṇa is an affectionate father. Within the groves of Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa is a veritable ocean of nectar. Kṛṣṇa is a

/Q: thunderbolt for the demons and the most dashing Cupid for the Vraja-gopīs. There is no one within the entire universe as heroic and charitable as Śrī Kṛṣṇa! No one’s activities can even slightly compare with Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental exploits. May that Kṛṣṇa, whose lotusface is kissed by the doe-eyed gopīs, protect us. Govinda-līlāmṛta 17.34-36 “Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental forms, qualities and pastimes are limitless. To purify myself I have touched a small fragment of Kṛṣṇa’s grandeur with my words. How can I hope to ever completely enumerate the infinite glories of my worshipable Lord?” The parrots’ minds blossomed with joy by diving and surfacing in the marvelous ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s qualities. They continued to offer wonderful prayers to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa: Govinda-līlāmṛta 17.48-49 “O Nandanandana, all glories to You! You are the cause of all rasas, being both the object and reservoir of love. You are the embodiment of vraja-rasa. Your beautiful lotus feet are embellished with incomparable qualities and endowed with ever-increasing spiritual nectar. The brilliant rays of Your ruby-like toenails dispel the darkness of lamentation from the hearts of Your devotees. Your fine dark complexion is spotlessly pure and astonishingly attractive. Your fame is spread throughout the universe. All glory to You, the bluish-black cowherd boy with unlimited beauty, wealth, patience and courage. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 15.220 “O Kṛṣṇa, the expert flute player! By the movements of Your eyes, which are more attractive than blooming autumnal lotuses, You destroy the patience of the wives of the Siddhas and Caraṇas. Your effulgent earrings are beautifully reflected in Your pearl necklaces. You pass Your time sporting in Govardhana’s many refreshing kuṇḍas. Your body is made of condensed knowledge and is the ornament for all ornaments. “You effortlessly killed the vicious Vṛṣabhāsura. Your glossy black hair is bedecked with a brilliant peacock feather, and Your lovely face is more radiant than millions of moons. You display Your expertise in all the arts of love in Vraja’s secluded bowers. Your supple snake-like arms are ever eager to embrace the swelling breasts of the sakhīs. “As You walk in Vṛndāvana, it seems that a tāmala tree is moving about. You fully satisfy the desires of Your beloved Vrajavāsīs. You carefully herd the cows with the stick in Your right hand. Your scintillating effulgence eclipses millions of moon and suns. Gorocana tilaka adorns Your forehead. The boy saints Sanaka and Sananda always relish Your fascinating qualities. O beautiful hero! Please make me happy by showing Yourself to Me!’ Govinda-virudāvalī 37 “O Keśava, all glories to You, who are profusely praised by Brahmā, Śiva and Ananta. The unique marks of the flag, thunderbolt and goad on Your lotus feet, and Your unlimited universal power clearly distinguish You as the Supreme Lord. Despite Your opulence, You cavort in carefree sports and fight foolish creatures like Kāliya. You play the role of Nanda’s innocent son to intensify the joy of Your devotees and increase the bliss of the residents of Gokula. Cupid himself becomes bewildered by Your mind-boggling beauty. Though the Vraja-gopīs sometimes sulk in the anger of loving jealousy, they immediately stop upon seeing Your extraordinarily beautiful form. You relish the rāsa of dancing with the golden gopīs and embracing their beautiful large breasts. You enjoy with the damsels of Vraja in hundreds of forest bowers. “None of the gopīs can satisfy You like Rādhikā, the crest-jewel of all the pretty ladies of Vraja. Your peacock feather and other ornaments fell to the ground when You exuberantly danced in the rāsa-

/Q: maṇḍala with Lalitā and other gopīs. Though Your eyes rolled lazily from the fatigue of dancing, they instantly blossomed with joy on seeing Rādhikā. Everyone offers respects to You! Even angry demons become liberated by Your merciful glance. You always protect the residents of Vraja and give bliss to Your devotees. O ocean of mercy, please deliver me from the ocean of material existence!” Govinda- virudāvalī 39 “Rādhārāṇī is a beautiful crescent moon of nectar born from the ocean of Vṛṣabhānu’s family. The line of red vermilion decorating the lovely part of Rādhā’s hair looks like a sweet river of nectar. I pray that my mind remains eternally fixed on Rādhikā, who becomes stunned with love for Kṛṣṇa whenever She hears about His transcendental form and qualities. Kiśorī binds Her beautiful braids with delicate, fragrant jasmine flowers. Rādhā’s large lotus eyes, restless with amorous desires, condemn the agile movements of khañjana birds. “Rādhā’s walking is more graceful than the gait of a regal mad elephant. Kiśorī’s sweet golden limbs are more charming than the petals of a golden campaka flower. The golden creepers of Rādhārāṇī’s tender arms are decorated with jeweled armlets and bracelets. The astonishingly wonderful loveliness of Rādhā’s divine form constantly enchants all the beautiful young girls of Vraja. “Rādhārāṇī’s gently smiling face conquers the elegance of the full moon. Condensed fresh sweetness has appeared as Rādhā’s lovely broad hips, which are bound by strings of bells. A wonderfully colorful blouse conceals the beautiful golden waterpots of Rādhikā’s large breasts. Rādhā’s glossy red lips fill Śyāma’s mind with a great longing to taste the delicious nectar therein. Rādhārāṇī’s shapely chin is splendidly anointed with a charming dot of musk. A large radiant pearl inlaid with gold and jewels hangs from Rādhā’s pretty nose. “Rādhikā’s blissful divine form is the essence of the sweet ocean of beauty surging with waves of love for Śyāma. The deer of Kṛṣṇa’s eyes has fallen into the well of nectar known as Rādhā’s enchanting navel. A red sāri encircles Rādhā’s divine body, which is made even more dazzling by Her brilliant earrings, necklaces and anklets. Kiśorī trembles with amorous passion whenever She sees Gokulacandra’s footprints on the forest path. Those whose hearts are greedy to taste the nectar of vraja-rasa must glorify the incomparably beautiful transcendental body of Rādhikā as per the descriptions of the experts in Vṛndāvana mellows. Saṅgīta-mādhava 23 “Millions of Lakṣmīs, the crown jewels of fortunate ladies, yearn to attain a tiny fraction of Rādhikā’s sweet character, Her moonlike luster, Her blissful love drenched pastimes and the beauty of Rādhā’s effulgent jewel-like finger and toenails. May Śrī Rādhā, the embodiment of ecstatic amorous rasa, appear in my heart! “The sight of Rādhikā’s glittering finger and toenails, which are millions of times dearer to Kṛṣṇa than His own life, intoxicates Him with the fresh nectar of erotic love. Kiśorī’s complexion is the color of golden saffron and Her form is the reservoir of all good fortune and auspiciousness. The beautiful damsels of Vraja are like so many decorations in Rādhā’s hair part. I pray that Śrīmatī Rādhikā will remain forever in my heart! “One particle of light from Rādhā’s toenails is Govinda’s most treasured possession. Youthful Rādhā is a great reservoir of prema rasa and the most generous bestower of prema rasa. Rādhārāṇī is my life and soul. “O mind! Please meditate on youthful Kiśorī who has stolen the passionate mind of Vṛndāvana-

/Q: candra. Rādhā’s attractive face, flowing with oceans of sweet kṛṣṇa-prema, is illuminated by the moonlight of Her gentle smile, which resembles a kunda flower full of nectar. Rādhā is fully attentive to the grand festival of erotic love for Kṛṣṇa that is continually celebrated in each of Her gorgeous limbs.”
/R: Saṅgīta-mādhava 23-27
= P: Madhyāhna-līlā (3:12 p.m.—3:36 p.m.)
-L: The sakhīs praise Rādhā’s beauty
/Q: After the parrots finished speaking, Kṛṣṇa hinted through His eyes that Lalitā and other sakhīs should affectionately glorify Rādhā’s beautiful divine form. Lalitā said, “The soles of Rādhā’s lotus feet are a formidable army shining with regal opulence. That army is equipped with many weapons, such as goads, arrows, bows, clubs, plows, chariots, flags, svastikas, elephants, conchshells, half-moons, barleycorns, lotus flowers, fish and shields which are decorations drawn in red lac. With these weapons the army of Rādhā’s foot soles has conquered all directions.” Viśākhā said, “The luster of Rādhā’s beautiful soft, sprout-like feet makes the red lotuses (kokanada) appear dull and unattractive. Besides, lotuses have the faults of taking birth from mud, closing at night and crying at night like the cakravāka bird (koka:flamingo) pining for her mate. Therefore, what may the metaphor hungry poets compare Rādhā’s lotus feet to?” Campākalatā said, “The unprecedented, wonderfully reddish, spotless full moons (candrāvali) of Śrīmatī’s toenails eternally shine in Hari’s heart and make the lilies of His senses blossom with delight. Kṛṣṇa forgets all about Candrāvali just by glancing at Rādhā’s immaculate toenails!” Citrā said, “When the king of fresh youth took command of Rādhā’s bodily empire, the powerful dacoits of Rādhā’s breasts and hips violently attacked Rādhā’s waist. They stole its thickness and bound it with three ropes [tribali: three folds of skin on a woman’s belly]. Rādhārāṇī’s ankles hid in fear of those rapacious thieves.” Tuṅgavidyā said, “Aha! Rādhā’s thighs have conquered the beautiful curve of the banana tree and embarrassed it. Did the Creator make the golden banana trunks of Rādhārāṇī’s luscious thighs as a cooling shelter for the Kṛṣṇa elephant burning from the summer heat of lust?” Indulekha added, “Did the Creator respond to Cupid’s prayer by presenting him the two golden posts of Rādhā’s thighs for tying up elephants? It appears so, because Cupid has used the strong chain of their charming sweetness to bind the mad elephant of Kṛṣṇa’s lusty mind!” Raṅgadevī said, “Vṛṣabhānunandinī’s knees are not knees. They are golden treasure boxes which playful Cupid uses to hide the gems of Govinda’s greedy eyes and heart after he happily steals them.” Sudevī said, “To what may the incomparably charming thighs of Rādhikā be compared? Kṛṣṇa loves to stroke them with His hands. If I compare them to an elephant’s trunk, the elephant will be embarrassed because its trunk is not so delightfully firm as Rādhikā’s thighs. If I compare them with a banana tree, it will also be ashamed because its middle is filled with watery fibers and its trunk does not taper as attractively as Kiśorī’s thighs.” Kāñcanalatā said, “The poets are correct when they compare Rādhā’s hips to the banks of the Yamunā, Her black braid to the river Yamunā and Her waistbelts to a flock of singing swans in the

/Q: Yamunā. Kṛṣṇa’s mind, the king of dancers, never stops rāsa dancing there along with the dancing girls of His desires.” Mādhavī said, “Rādhā’s slender waist made friends with the waist of the lion, the enemy of elephants. Due to fear, anger and lamentation, Rādhā’s waist contemplated, ‘The deceitful thieves of Rādhā’s breasts, hips and thighs have made friends with the trunks and temples of the elephants by assuming their shape while stealing my vastness during puberty.’” Vasantī said, “At one time, Rādhā’s breasts and hips were poor, so they formed an alliance and stole the wealth of Rādhā’s waist. Due to greed, however, they constantly bickered over who should claim the most. To stop the quarrel and end further disputes, the Creator set up three boundary lines on Rādhā’s belly (Her three folds of skin, tribali).” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.50-62 Vṛndā-devī said, “The beauty of Rādhā’s belly makes the āśvattha leaves tremble and the golden lotus petals stop shaking in the wind. The fine line of hair rising from Rādhā’s navel appears like tilaka made of musk.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.65 Tuṅgavidyā said, “Rādhārāṇī’s glistening body is actually a tropical jungle. Within that jungle resides the maddened elephant of Rādhikā’s lusty desires. The bulging, musk-decorated forehead of that elephant poses as the breasts of Śrīmatī. Taking Cupid’s goad in His hand, Kṛṣṇa struck that elephant’s forehead hundreds of times. For this reason, there are so many marks on Kiśorī’s beautiful breasts.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.31 Lalitā said, “Rādhikā’s hands look very enchanting with the auspicious marks of a golden pitcher, lotus garland, fan, crescent-moon, earrings, parasol, sacrificial post, conchshell, beautiful bilva tree, altar, throne, flower, creeper, cāmara and svastika. It seems that Rādhā is serving Her beloved Keśava with these auspicious marks.” Viśākhā said, “If lotus flowers (Rādhā’s hands) were beautified by cāmpaka flower buds (Rādhā’s fingers) tipped with ruby-hued full moons (Rādhā’s fingernails, which are sharper than Cupid’s goads), it would still not equal the beauty of Rādhā’s attractive hands which conquer the beauty of lotus flowers and fresh sprouts.” Campākalatā said, “Rādhikā’s sharp fingernails resemble Kāmadeva’s chisels that carve various designs upon the sapphire door of Kṛṣṇa’s chest.” Citrā said, “The golden lotus stems of Rādhā’s arms are Cupid’s noose for binding the blossoming tamāla tree of Kṛṣṇa’s form. Rādhā’s armpits are like lotus pods. Her arms are golden creepers bearing the two bael fruits of Her breasts and the two beautiful fresh sprouts of Her hands.” Govinda- līlāmṛta 1.66-69 Sudevī smiled while asking, “Is it a golden name plate inscribed with the black letters of Cupid’s victory? Is it a golden sheath for Cupid’s sword, or a golden case for Cupid’s snake noose? No, it is none of these. It is Rādhā’s beautiful back upon which swings Her braid.” Candramukhī said, “The greatest poets proclaim that Kiśorī’s shoulders slope gracefully from carrying the weight of Giridhāri’s strong arms. I think they just appear sloped because Rādhā’s head is raised in pride over conquering the beauty of every Vraja-gopī, Dvārakā queen and Vaikuṇṭha Lakṣmī.” Mādhavī said, “For the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa the Creator made three graceful lines on Rādhā’s neck, which represent the three goddesses of perfect beauty, charming poetry and melodious song.”

/Q: Vṛndā-devī said, “Upon hearing Rādhikā’s sweet voice, the melodious cuckoos fled into the forest, nectar turned bitter and the sonorous vīṇā fell silent. Conchshells crawled back to the sea in shame upon beholding Śrīmatī’s elegant neck. To what can the poets compare Rādhā’s beautiful neck?” Dhaniṣṭhā said, “‘The black musk dot on Rādhā’s chin defies the beauty of a bumblebee sitting on a golden lotus petal basking in the morning sun, or a cuckoo resting in the window of a golden temple.’ I overheard Śyāma say this when He raised Rādhā’s chin with His fingers to kiss Her.” Lalitā said, “Rādhā’s ruddy lips are described as bimba or bandhujīva because they are an external reflection (bimba) of Rādhā’s deep love for Kṛṣṇa and they are the very life (bandhujīva) of Her Priyatama. It is not that Rādhā’s lips are red like the bimba fruit or the bandhujīva flower.” Govinda- līlāmṛta 1.72-78 Campākalatā said, “Rādhā’s teeth are as white as jasmine flowers and as brilliant as diamonds. From nibbling the bimba fruits of Kṛṣṇa’s lips, the parrot beaks of Rādhā’s teeth have have become tainted ruby red.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.81 Raṅgadevī said, “Perceiving that the youthful couple of Kṛṣṇa’s name and fame were eager to enjoy swing pastimes, the Creator fashioned the swing of Rādhā’s tongue and covered it with a crimson sheet.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.84 Sudevī said, “Rādhikā’s voice is pure nectar for Kṛṣṇa’s ears. Every syllable Priyaji utters surpasses waves in an ocean of nectar. Her voice filled with jokes and riddles, flavored with various emotional rasas and displaying a host of literary ornaments, teaches the bees and cuckoos how to sing.” Campākalatā said, “Kiśorī’s astonishing voice resembles rasālā nectar. That rasālā drink is composed of ghee in the form of prema, sugar—Rādhā’s humor, honey—Her charm, camphor—Her gentle smile and black pepper—Rādhā’s pretentious jealousy. Kṛṣṇa relishes the rasālā drink with supreme delight.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.85-86 Vasantī said, “The wonderful qualities of Kṛṣṇa grow like a wish-fulfilling creeper in the garden of Rādhā’s heart. Their flowers are blooming as Rādhā’s sweet smiles.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.88 Viśākhā said, “The Creator fashioned the unprecedented full moon of Rādhā’s face just to please the cakora bird eyes of Kṛṣṇa. He placed two deer on the moon in the form of Rādhā’s eyes. Observing that the deer were fidgety, the Creator bound them with the two ropes of Rādhā’s ears.” Campākalatā said, “The moon is contaminated by spots, gets eclipsed and closes the beautiful lotus flowers with it’s touch. Therefore, what can compare with the luminous orb of Rādhā’s face, which is spotless, perfectly pure and always full?” Citrā said, “Kṛṣṇa slakes His intense thirst by beholding the lovely cheeks of Rādhā, which vanquish the pride of golden mirrors. Rādhā’s pretty cheeks resemble twin lakes of effulgent nectar on a planet of gold. Rādhā’s two lotus bud ear ornaments hang over the lakes. The musk designs on Rādhā’s cheeks are the moss covering the lakes wherein the two makarīs (female dolphins) of Rādhā’s earrings swim about.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.92-94 Sudevī added, “The beautiful curve of Rādhā’s nose resembles a sesame flower. It also looks like the quiver wherein the hunter named Cupid stores His arrows. When Rādhā smiles these arrows pierce the deer-like heart of Kṛṣṇa.” Mādhavī said, “Ignorant poets say that the pearl hanging below Priyaji’s nose has become red and black like a guñja seed from reflecting the red of Rādhā’s lips and the black of Her eyeliner. The fact

/Q: is that Rādhā’s heart is śyāma colored from always thinking of Her lover. Rādhā’s heart is also a rich red color due to Her intense attachment to Kṛṣṇa. These two colors reflect on Rādhā’s nose pearl whenever She sighs.” Vasantī said, “The Creator has collected the sweet essence of every beautiful object in the universe to produce Rādhā’s attractive eyes. The leftover portions fell to the ground and became bumblebees, deer eyes, cakora birds, lotuses, fish and water lilies.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.98-100 Vṛndā said, “The pupils in Rādhā’s lotus eyes are like two bumblebee progenitors that create countless loving moods that swarm out from Her sidelong glances.” Lalitā said, “Kiśorī’s eyebrows, which curve like captivating creepers, have sprouted two blue flowers disguised as a pair of eyes.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.103-104 Campākalatā said, “Rādhā’s gorgeous forehead, situated between Her black eyebrows and curly locks, looks like a golden mādhavī petal encircled by restless bumblebees. Rādhā’s splendid forehead has crushed the pride of the brilliant crescent moon.” Tuṅgavidyā gazed at Rādhikā’s splendid red tilaka and the red line in Her hair part peeking out from under Rādhā’s red veil. Then she said, “Is this Cupid’s copper bowl covered by a red cloth, which he uses for worship while displaying various hand gestures?” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.106-107 Mādhavī said, “The curly locks resting on Rādhā’s forehead look like a swarm of bees greedily drinking the sweet nectar of Her lotus face. The clever hunter Cupid uses them as a net to capture the deer of Kṛṣṇa’s eyes.” Vasantī said, “From constantly meditating on Śyāma, unlimited black creepers have sprouted in Rādhā’s mind. The creepers, sprinkled with the nectar of Rādhā’s love, grew longer and longer and finally appeared externally as Rādhā’s lovely dark tresses.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.  1- 12 Lalitā said, “The beautiful braid of curving-eyebrowed Rādhā resembles the Trivenī with its red jewels shining like the Sarasvatī, its pearls and white flower garlands as the Gaṅgā and its natural dark sheen as the Yamunā.” Rūpa-mañjarī said, “When the camarī deer and the peacocks saw Rādhikā’s loosened locks after She enjoyed with Kṛṣṇa, they cursed their beautiful tails and fled into the mountains and tree tops out of shame.” Lalitā said, “Rādhikā’s divine body is an emporium of exotic fragrances. Her hair, eyebrows and navel smell like a blue lotus anointed with aguru and musk. Her face, ears, nose, breasts and feet exude the fragrance of lotuses mixed with camphor. Rādhā’s nails, armpits and hips smell like ketakī flowers mixed with sandalwood.” Viśākhā said, “Rādhikā’s refulgent body is ornamented with all beauty and sweetness to delight Kṛṣṇa’s senses. The consummate splendor of Rādhā’s limbs defeats the pride of all objects of comparison such as the moon, gold, lilies, lotus flowers and lotus stems.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1. 15- 18 Tuṅgavidyā said, “Where such chastity prevails, what is the question of adultery? Where such deep love flourishes, how can there be any obstruction from others? Where such intense eagerness exists, how can Kṛṣṇa neglect Her? These three questions pierce the core of our hearts like spears.” Raṅgadevī asked, “Who is the source of kṛṣṇa-prema? It is Rādhā alone. Who is Kṛṣṇa’s dearest

/Q: sakhī? It is Rādhikā alone. With Her curly hair, restless eyes, firm breasts and incomparable qualities Rādhā fulfills all of Kṛṣṇa’s desires like no one else.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.121-122 Mādhavī said, “Rādhā did not take initiation nor hear from a śikṣā-guru, yet She reigns as the ācārya of all the sixty-four arts for the doe-eyed Vraja-gopīs, who astonish the women of the three worlds with their skills. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa (the ocean of all artistic talent) is completely fascinated by Śrī Rādhā.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.124 Dhaniṣṭhā said, “Whether awake, dreaming or in deep sleep there is no one else but Govinda in Gāndharvikā’s mind, body, words and senses.” Vṛndā said, “Rādhikā’s playful dancing glances have stolen the wealth of Hari’s patience. They have completely defeated the graceful charm of the bees, does, cakorī birds, khañjana birds, sapharī fishes, blue lotuses and Cupid’s arrows.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.126-127 Viśākhā said, “Kṛṣṇa’s potencies of gīr (speech) bhū (earth) and līlā (play) are the most qualified of all pretty girls. Lakṣmī-devī is superior to them and greater than Her are the loving damsels of Vraja, of whom Candrāvalī is the most beautiful group leader. However, without a doubt, Śrī Rādhā is the most qualified of all because She alone always arouses Kṛṣṇa’s thirst for love. Candrāvalī, with great difficulty, can subjugate Śyāma with her love, beauty and qualities. Rādhā, however, with just one of Her attributes easily makes Kṛṣṇa forget all about Candrāvalī. Therefore, we need not mention Rādhā’s other qualities.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.130-131 Raṅgadevī said, “Even though Śrī Rādhā may not be adorned with nice ornaments, when She is near Her lover Kṛṣṇa, Rādhārāṇī becomes naturally decorated with the ornaments of Her intense love for Him. These ornaments satisfy both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. However, when Rādhā is separated from Kṛṣṇa, even if She is wearing all Her favorite ornaments, She looks pale and sad due to anxiety and so do Her sakhīs.” Sudevī smiled while saying, “Rādhikā is truly worthy of the title “Kṛṣṇamayī” because She constantly sees Kṛṣṇa in front and behind Her, at Her sides, in Her eyes, cheeks and breasts. Rādhā even sees Kṛṣṇa reflected within Her jeweled locket.” Indulekha said, “Cupid could not find a means of counterattack after being defeated by Kṛṣṇa’s superb beauty. However, when he discovered Rādhā’s intense affection for Kṛṣṇa, he decided to torture Her instead whenever Kṛṣṇa is absent.” Vṛndā said, “How amazing! Whenever Rādhikā experiences trembling, perspiring, horripilation and ecstatic tears from Mukunda’s touch, the same signs of love simultaneously appear on Her sakhīs. Whenever Kṛṣṇa eagerly drinks the nectar of Kiśorī’s lips, the sakhīs also become madly intoxicated.” Kundalatā said, “Indeed, Rādhā is a most munificent donor. Rādhā accepted the lovely garland of Śyāma’s amorous scratches. Rādhā then returned the favor many fold by offering Kṛṣṇa a beautiful necklace of love bites. Kṛṣṇa sipped the nectar of Rādhikā’s lips and gave His own lips to be tasted by Her teeth. The sakhīs relished Rādhā-Mādhava’s prasāda with their eyes as a garland placed around their necks.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.134-138 Lalitā said, “Lord Brahma became embarrassed upon beholding the splendid form of Rādhā, who was fashioned by some other Creator. Brahma desired to create women more beautiful than Rādhā. He carefully collected the best ingredients and utilized his finest artistic talent. Brahma however, failed

/Q: to create any women to match Śrī Rādhā. They were all completely useless in comparison to Rādhā.” Govinda-līlāmṛta  1.143 Lalitā concluded, “May the world understand that it is impossible to count the unlimited glories of Rādhā. We simply become baffled in our attempt to do so. Sarasvatī herself, even with all the words in her storehouse of knowledge, cannot fully describe Rādhā’s transcendental qualities.” The sakhīs thus jokingly praised Rādhā’s form with various poetic phrases and analogies. Rādhā felt happy. Due to shyness, however, She exhibited a contrary mood and cast crooked glances at Kṛṣṇa. Mādhava immersed in joy upon hearing about Rādhikā’s spectacular beauty and viewing Her different moods. Govinda-līlāmṛta 1.145-146 The female parrot, taking a hint from Vṛndā, said, “What an amazing thing the creator has made! Two red lotuses are supporting a pair of inverted golden banana trunks, a golden throne, a well of nectar, a pair of cuckoos joined together, a full moon and a mass of darkness. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 8.23 “O Rādhā! If a multitude of full moons rose at once to flood countless universes with the nectar moonlight of pure love, that flood might give a slight hint of the incredible radiance of Your lovely face visible in the groves of Vṛndāvana. “May Rādhā, who is the reigning goddess of ever-fresh sweet love, whose form is condensed bliss, who enjoys splendid pastimes under the desire trees on the banks of the Yamunā, who is incited by the emotions Her confidential friends, and whose lotus feet make streams of ambrosia flow in the hearts of Her devotees appear before us! Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 126-127 “Kṛṣṇa drops His flute and faints when He is struck by Rādhā’s sidelong glances. The peacock feather falls from His turban and His yellow garments slip off. When will I sweetly serve such a Rādhikā? Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 39 “O Rādhikā! All glories to Your fresh youth! With the twin lotus buds of Your beautiful plump breasts, and Your graceful hips widened by blooming rasa-qualities, You steal the mind of that great enchanter. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 45 “May the softness of Your golden body, the sweetness of Your gentle smile, the length of the corners of Your eyes, the heaviness of Your breasts, the thinness of Your waist, the grace of Your gentle steps, the broadness of Your hips, the crookedness of Your eyebrows, the redness of Your cherry-lips and the numbness in Your heart inlaid with rasa, be the objects of my constant meditation. Rādhā-rasa- sudhā-nidhi 75 “I offer my obeisances to the embodiment of sweet, ever-fresh bower pastimes known as lotus-eyed Rādhā, whose body is more spendrous than millions of lightning flashes, whose divine face emits ever-increasing joy and delight, whose palms shine like fresh leaf buds, whose splendid red lips shine like coral gems and whose large breasts are as beautiful as golden lotus buds. Rādhā-rasa- sudhā-nidhi 99 “O Supreme Lakṣmī with a glowing moonlike face, charming doe eyes, a lovely nose, reddish lips, a sweet smile, beautiful vine-like arms, a conchshell smooth neck, breasts like regal mountains, a slender waist and broad hips, plantain-tree-shaped thighs and moonlike toe nails illuminating Your lotus feet! O Rādhe, when will You be worshiped by me? Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 17 “You knit Your restless eyebrows in playful anger and emit sweet sarcastic words from Your beautiful cherry-red lips as You enjoy a lovers’ quarrel with the crest jewel of relishers. O Rādhikā, I

/Q: remember Your beautiful face, joyous with all the arts of love. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 120 “O Rādhikā! I meditate on Your charming face, beautified by intense love and shining like a spotless full moon. A splendid pearl hangs beneath Your sesame-flower shaped nose. Outstanding tilaka adorns Your forehead which is bordered by bouncing curly tresses. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 186 “O Rādhikā! I remember Your pretty innocent face beautified with the glistening pearls of Your teeth, the jewel-like radiance of Your fresh sprout-like lips, Your swinging dolphin-shaped earrings and Your timid sidelong glances. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 185 “O mind, worship the brilliant form called Rādhā, whose crown illuminates all directions and whose armlets, bracelets and necklaces defeat the luster of millions of jewels. The sash of bells on Rādhā’s hips jingles sweetly with the anklebells on Her dainty lotus feet. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 121 “I gaze upon Rādhā’s divine form, immersed in a continuous festival of erotic love and more effulgent than millions of lightning flashes. Rādhā’s lovely braid is dressed with jasmine garlands. Her hair part dazzles with a line of red sindūra. Rādhā’s distinctive tilaka is colored with nine jewels. Her cheeks shine with earrings. A long necklace and a golden locket grace Rādhā’s neck. Rādhārāṇī’s lovely red dress rivals the rising sun. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 130 “Glory to Śrī Rādhā, who is the jewel of magnificent divine love sports, the jewel of youthful splendor, the jewel of all clever girls with sweet graceful limbs, the jewel of graceful opulence, the jewel of great sweetness and the jewel of amorous pastimes. Śrī Rādhā is the only jewel of nectarean beauty and the jewel that means everything to Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 245 “O my Queen Rādhikā! O enchantress who casts a spell over the prince of the cowherders! Nectar oceans of concentrated deliciousness naturally flow from the corners of Your eyes. You have a sweetly smiling lotus face and Your crooked sidelong glances melt with compassion. Please cast Your glance of mercy upon me!”
/R: Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi 189
-L: The female parrot describes the sakhīs
/Q: The female parrot continued, “Please meditate on Rādhikā’s golden-complexioned sakhīs, adorned with jewelled earrings, swinging glistening nose pearls, armlets, bracelets, sashes, anklets, ornaments of gold and jewels and different colored sārīs. They have exquisitely beautiful breasts, waists and hips. Attractive necklaces shine on their blouses and fragrant flowers hang from the ends of their moving braids. Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta 3.40 “O Rādhā! I offer respects to Lalitā, Your dearest and best sakhī. Her complexion is golden like gorocana, her cloth resembles the hue of a peacock feather and she pleases You with tāmbūla sevā. “O Rādhā! I offer respects to Viśākhā, whose complexion resembles lightning, whose brilliant cloth has star-like patterns, who is similar to You in character and who is expert in arranging Your garments and ornaments and offering sandalwood. “O Rādhā! I surrender to Campakalatā, whose qualities resemble those of Viśākhā. Her complexion is yellow-white like a blooming campaka flower and she wears cloth the color of a blue jay. She waves a jeweled cāmara to please You. “O Rādhikā! I take shelter of Citrā, who has a charming heart, a saffron complexion and cloth the color of crystal. She pleases You by offering varieties of colorful cloth. “O Rādhā! I worship Your dear sakhī Tuṅgavidyā, whose complexion resembles red cosmetic

/Q: powder tinged with camphor. She wears attractive, pale yellow cloth. She possesses a host of qualities such as mercy, extensive wisdom and skill in all services. “O Rādhā! I offer respects to Your sakhī Indulekhā, who has a greenish-yellow complexion and wears light scarlet cloth (like pomegranate flowers). Her beautiful bodily luster outshines the moonbeams. She pleases You by dancing. “O Rādhā! I worship Your dear sakhī Raṅgadevī, whose complexion is yellowish-red like lotus stamens. She wears bright red cloth resembling a javā flower (hibiscus). Many of her qualities match those of Campakalatā. “O Rādhā! I devotedly offer respects to Sudevī, whose complexion is yellowish-red like lotus stamens. She wears bright red cloth resembling a javā flower (hibiscus). [same as her twin sister Raṅgadevī] Sudevī is skillful in devotion. With her many good qualities She enthuses all the gopīs. Sāadhanāmṛta-candrika 2.23 “I offer respects to Anaṅga-mañjarī, whose complexion defeats that of the ketakī flower in spring. Her blue cloth mocks the color of a blue lotus. Sādhanāmṛta-candrika 2.24 “Rādhā’s teenage maidservants (mañjarīs) have splendid golden complexions. They are ravishingly beautiful with slender waists, full hips, pearl nose rings inlaid with gold and jewels, lovely jewelled earrings, glossy braided hair, jeweled necklaces shining on their bud-like breasts, attractive colorful garments and glittering ornaments. The mañjarīs wear charming armlets and bangles on their vine- like arms and melodiously tinkling waistbells and anklets. They overflow with prema for Śrī Rādhā, the mistress of their lives. Please meditate on the divine forms of Rādhārāṇī’s golden-complexioned mañjarīs. Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta 2.58-59 “When will I see Lavaṅga-mañjarī (Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī), whose complexion defeats a lightning flash, whose cloth shines with star clusters, who is gentle and yielding in love (dakṣiṇā-mṛdvī) and whose age is thirteen years six months and one day? “When will I see Rūpa-mañjarī (Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī), whose complexion is yellow like goracanā pigment, whose dress is the color of peacock feathers, whose character is proud in love (vāmā- madhya) and who is thirteen and a half years old? “When will I see Rati-mañjarī (Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī), whose dress is covered with stars, whose complexion is like lightning, whose age is thirteen years two months and who is gentle and yielding in love (dakṣiṇā-mṛdvī)? “When will Guṇa-mañjarī (Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī), who has lovely limbs, a lightning bright complexion, a fine silk dress the color of a red javā flower, whose nature is both yielding (dakṣinā) and uncooperative (prakharā) and who is thirteen years and one month old, be merciful to Me? “When will I see Rāga-mañjarī (Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī), whose golden complexion is like a blossoming campaka, whose dress is whiter than the feathers of a swan, who is very gentle and cooperative in love (dakṣiṇā-mṛdvī) and is thirteen years old? “May Vilāsa-mañjarī (Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī), whose bodily color derides a golden ketakī flower, whose dress is the shade of a bumblebee, who is proud (vāma) but gentle (mṛdvī) and who is twelve years and eleven months old, be merciful to Me! “I worship attractive Mañjulālī-mañjarī (Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī), whose complexion is molten gold, whose dress is red like a javā flower, who wears golden clothing and beautiful ornaments and who

/Q: serves Rādhā by dressing Her. “I continually worship Kastūrī-mañjarī (Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī), whose complexion is the color of a golden lotus, whose cloth is the color of crystal and who is engaged in giving sandalwood to Rādhā. “When will Kanaka-mañjarī, whose complexion glows like lightning, who wears dark cloth the color of bees, who is cooperative (dakṣinā) and gentle and whose age is twelve years and ten months, be merciful to Me? “When will I see Rasavelā-mañjarī, whose complexion derides the brilliance of sandalwood mixed with gorocana? Her fine cloth is dark blue like a jambu fruit. Sādhanāmṛta-candrikā 2.23 “O Vṛndā, I offer respects to your lotus feet! You bathe your associates in the golden waves of your complexion which derides the splendor of campaka and lightning. You wear red cloth the color of the bandhuka flower.” Sādhanāmṛta-candrikā 2.24 Īśvarī Rādhikā was very pleased with the sincere descriptions of the female parrot. Rādhā held the parrot in Her hand, lovingly stroked her with Her finger and asked her to keep reciting. Kṛṣṇa did the same with the male parrot. Rādhā said, “O parrot! Please praise Kṛṣṇa, the best of the cowherds, whose complexion rivals a fresh raincloud, who effortlessly lifted Govardhana and who sits within a flower cottage on the bank of My kuṇḍa. Just say, ‘O Kṛṣṇa! You are a mine filled with all jewel-like qualities, an ocean of erotic loving mellows and a reservoir of sweet honey wine which intoxicates the youthful damsels of Vraja. O Kṛṣṇa, You are the best of romantic gallants, the topmost handsome one and the delight of the Vrajavāsīs. All glories to You!’ “O parrot! Just recite, ‘O lifter of Govardhana Hill, all glory to You! You protected Vraja by destroying demons like Aghā, Bakā, Śakaṭa and the forest fire. Your lotus feet, which conquer the pride of a fresh, thousand-petaled lotus, always give shelter to Your surrendered devotees.’” Govinda-līlāmṛta 18.1-4 Kṛṣṇa induced the female parrot to glorify the beauty and qualities of Rādhā by saying, “O śārīkā! Please praise My Priyatama, whose enchanting face derides a full-blown lotus and thousands of moons, and whose host of noble qualities eclipses the pride of all other women in the universe. “O parrot just say, ‘O Rādhikā! You are supremely opulent, fortunate and charming. You are famous as the golden swan playing in the lake of Giridhārī’s heart. All the young girls in the universe are Your disciples in learning the arts of love.’ “Just recite, ‘Rādhā, You are a jewel mine of all auspicious qualities, a swelling nectar ocean of prema and You are worshiped by all the virtuous girls in the universe for Your chastity. Kiśorī, the queen of the glorious realm of Vṛndāvana, reigns here as the original, splendid goddess of fortune. ’
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 18.8-10
-L: The gambling match
/Q: Vṛndā brought grapes and pomegranate seeds as a reward for the parrots. Rādhā-Mādhava tenderly fed them with Their own hands. After satisfying the birds, Rādhā-Govinda went to play dice in a green grove named Sudevi Sukhada Kuñja (the kuñja that gives joy to Sudevī).
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 18.24-25

/Q: Rādhā said, “O sakhī Lalitā! Just as an elephant plucks lotus flowers, Kṛṣṇa has forcefully defeated us in the sports of honey-wine drinking, water splashing and swinging. They were all power games. Now let us play a game that requires some intelligence. We can quickly diminish Kṛṣṇa’s pride!” Lalitā replied, “O Rādhā! You are moonlight for the night blooming lotuses who will win at gambling. O proud girl, what can the darkness of defeat do to us? It will not give us any sorrow.” Rādhā consulted with Lalitā and said, “O My dearest! You are the most powerful person! Why don’t You accept the challenge of the dancing girls of our desires to defeat You in a clever dice game?” Kṛṣṇa replied, “O sakhī Rādhā! You are making the dancing girl of the desire to defeat Me dance in Your heart. However, when the king of victory sits upon the throne of My lotus palm, that dancing girl will run home in shame.” Rādhikā showed Her displeasure with Kṛṣṇa’s bold words by a slight twitch of Her eye brow. Rādhā had Sudevī bring the game board for throwing dice. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 15.1-6 Kṛṣṇa and the Vraja-gopīs, with beautiful red lips, gathered at the gambling arena. Śyāma and the gopīs were both expert at throwing dice. Their minds were excited by the ecstasies of love. What a fabulous sight to see Vrajendranandana, surrounded by the most stunning women in the universe, sitting on a sapphire platform under a tree at the edge of the grove. Vṛndā, who perfectly knows the hints of Rādhā and the gopīs, said to Hari, “O lotus-eyed one! Let us see Your skill at playing dice. The wooden game board is handcrafted and inset with golden lines. The opulent playing pieces (pawns) are made of emerald and gold. O Kṛṣṇa, whose beautiful long arms reach the knees! The attractive dice are made of ivory and elegantly marked. It is astonishing that You have not yet become absorbed in a dice game to increase Your pleasure a hundred-fold.” Kṛṣṇa accepted the challenge with a smile and said, “Let the women prepare themselves and play with Me!” Kṛṣnāhnika-kaumudī 4.239-244 Kṛṣṇa sat opposite Rādhā while Nāndīmukhī acted as the witness for Kṛṣṇa and Vṛndā for Rādhā. Kundalatā was the game board supervisor. Madhumaṅgala set Kṛṣṇa’s wagers and Lalitā set Rādhā’s. First, the dice stones danced on the stage of Rādhikā’s red lotus palm and bounced up and down as they fell on the table. Kṛṣṇa’s eyes submerged in high waves of joy admiring Kiśorī’s beautiful armpits and shaking breasts. Somehow Kṛṣṇa kept His composure due to His experience in holding and tossing dice. While throwing the dice Rādhā sometimes exclaimed, “Daśa, daśa (ten, ten).” At other times, Rādhā proclaimed, “Viduḥ, viduḥ (they know).” Śrī Rādhikā appeared to be Jayaśrī, the goddess of victory, making the dice fall on the desired number. Hearing Rādhā say “Daśa, daśa,” Kṛṣṇa replied, “O Priyaji! It is funny that You pray for daśa yet Your dice falls on vitti. Now where is Your talk of victory?” Kṛṣṇa, being unable to take His pawns from Rādhā’s corner, deeply pondered the rules of the game. He sacrificed His pawns and played with a fervent desire to win. The sober sakhīs laughed loudly when clever Rādhikā defeated Śyāma by throwing the right score. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 15.7-13 Kṛṣṇa lost the wager of His Kaustubha gem. At that time, the sakhīs said, “The gem has already touched the breasts of many gopīs, so how can it be worn by our dear sakhī? It should be swapped for a bangle or purified by washing it many times.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 15.17

/Q: The sakhīs taunted Kṛṣṇa’s assistant Madhumaṅgala, “This is not the forest for herding cows and killing demons like Baka, Vatsa or Pūtana. This is a dice game where one’s wit will be tested in a public assembly!” The Sarasvatī river of the sakhīs’ rough words uprooted the tree of Madhumaṅgala’s cleverness. Madhumaṅgala, feeling a bit afraid, said, “Kṛṣṇa, give me Your Kaustubha. I am going away on some business. Now the gopīs may attack You since You are all alone. I will inform Yaśodā and she will tie them up with the ropes of punishment and throw them in a dark cave of embarassment!” Kṛṣṇa said, “Damn fool! Why are you so afraid without cause? I will trounce the gopīs, just wait and see! Do not be so stupid as to announce My defeat with your panicky gestures!” Madhumaṅgala angrily replied, “O Kṛṣṇa! You are getting disturbed even though I am speaking for Your benefit. Ok, let them steal Your Kaustubha! Let these young girls play with You, turn You into a pauper and make You dance around. But I am leaving!” Kṛṣṇa, with a wink of His eye, drew support from the sakhīs and falsely spoke, “O assembly! I have defeated these whimsical young girls, but just see their rude manners.” The sakhīs replied, “If You won, why did You remain silent when the gopīs criticized Madhumaṅgala?” Kṛṣṇa answered, “I was astonished by their audacity and therefore remained silent.” Viśākhā laughed, “I offer my obeisances to Your dancing eyebrows that are like rival gopīs who destroy our chastity. Now they are becoming our friends by demonstrating the falsity of Your words and making us happy.” Kṛṣṇa’s witness Nāndīmukhī said, “O prince of Vraja! You have been defeated. Now give the Kaustubha to Rādhā!” Kṛṣṇa felt crestfallen upon hearing this. Kundalatā took the jewel from Kṛṣṇa’s neck and hung it on Rādhā’s chest. Kundalatā observed Kṛṣṇa’s reflection in the Kaustubha gem on Rādhikā’s chest and remarked, “O Kṛṣṇa, how beautifully You are reflected between Rādhikā’s breasts! Out of great love this king of jewels keeps You on the breasts of Your beloved.” Kṛṣṇa, overwhelmed in joy, cried slightly while addressing His reflection, “O reflection! You are the all beautiful Kṛṣṇa and I am only Your reflection. It has always been My desire to be situated where You are now.” Rādhā, in an unseen way, lowered Her head in order to relish Kṛṣṇa’s reflection in the Kaustubha gem hanging between Her breasts. Rādhā cursed Her blouse for impeding His touch and Her shyness for blocking Her continuous looking at Him. Rādhā then immersed in bliss and became stunned. Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 15.17-30 Kṛṣṇa said, “Let the second wager be My flute and Your sakhī Lalitā. O proud victor, I will attain Lalitā if I win. And if I lose, I will happily give You My flute.” Rādhā said, “I cannot accept the unequal wager of Lalitā and Your flute. Can one ever compare a stick of wood with a jeweled wand? Please do not cheat in this matter.” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.248 Kalāvatī-sakhī said, “Has the third wager been decided?” Rādhā laughed while responding, “You will be My wager and Kṛṣṇa’s necklace will be His wager.” Kalāvatī said, “I will now set the fourth wager. Winning the wager, You both will be satisfied and

/Q: drown in the ocean of happiness.” Kṛṣṇa ordered, “Please speak up!” Kalāvatī said, “O Rādhā! Please hear my pleasing words. Your stake will be a kiss and Kṛṣṇa’s will be a thousand embraces.” Rādhā, knitting Her eyebrows and turning red with anger, replied, “O artful one! You can play with Kṛṣṇa for the wager!” One smiling sakhī tried to pacify Rādhā by clutching Her hand and pleading, “O Rādhā! The sakhī has spoken nicely. Do not become angry with the wager. Just consider that Your wager is very light and Kṛṣṇa’s wager is very heavy. If You lose, You give something insignificant. However, if You win, You gain something very valuable. Either way, You gain the most auspicious things.” Pacified, Rādhā sat beside the game board and arranged the pieces. The pawns, illuminated by Rādhā’s jeweled rings, reflected the nectar glow of Her smile. Candramukhī Rādhā adroitly lifted the dice and offered them to Kṛṣṇa while speaking in a low firm voice, “You throw first.” Rādhā enjoyed witnessing how Kṛṣṇa’s hands glowed with the reflection of the dice. One clever sakhī said, “Hey Rādhe! Throw, throw the dice! Make sure that Kṛṣṇa does not win and take Your necklace. You are expert at winning, so capture Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha jewel and make us happy.” Śyāma scored a winning number with His first throw. Nevertheless, to turn it otherwise, Rādhā picked up the dice and passed them to Kṛṣṇa’s hands. Again, Kṛṣṇa threw a winner. He moved the pawns and thereby crushed Rādhā’s pride. As the two expert gamblers played with knowledge of the way the dice would roll, neither was victorious and neither was defeated. Rādhā intelligently admitted defeat and Kṛṣṇa accepted the victory. When Kṛṣṇa came to take Her necklace, Rādhā personally offered it to Him. Rādhikā, intending to defeat Kṛṣṇa, raised Her arm and threw the dice. Rādhikā’s pose made Kṛṣṇa anxious with the fear of losing. Rādhā defeated Kṛṣṇa, snatched His flute and passed it to Lalitā, who hugged it as her own. Kṛṣṇa won the third wager and accepted the prize of Kalāvatī, the sakhī filled with excellent qualities. All the sakhīs laughed boisterously as Kṛṣṇa dragged off Kalāvatī. Kalāvati reprimanded them, “O beautiful women! Do not laugh! You too will see the cunning goddess of gambling!” The sakhīs said, “O sakhī Rādhā! Kalāvatī has spoken correctly. Your mind is not concentrated on the game. The goddess of dice games will defeat everyone.” Vṛndā said, “O sakhī! When You took Kṛṣṇa’s beloved flute, He did not lament even a bit. Rather He beamed a soft smile. Therefore, sakhīs, do not be worried about regaining Kalāvatī, for that will be difficult. When defeated justly, the wise of steady hearts do not lament, even for a jewel. “If you say, ‘One can easily obtain another flute in the forest, however, there is no one with qualities like Kalāvatī to be found on the earth,’ then give up the flute. Why should you be so possessive of a piece of dry bamboo?” Lalitā replied, “O strict Vṛndā! We know you are always partial to Kṛṣṇa. Because of that, you close your eyes in the daylight and cannot distinguish good from bad. Being careless, our inattentive sakhī previously lost an exquisite necklace. And now She has now lost our dear friend.”

/Q: Rādhā, the expert gambler, took Lalitā’s wise words seriously. She cupped the dice in both hands and threw them before Kṛṣṇa. The gambling match accelerated between the two lovers. Where the master of the game was Cupid, could there be defeat in love? The time had arrived for the fourth wager of a kiss and embraces. Rādhā was hesitant about losing, but She was well prepared for Her victory. Although Kṛṣṇa played effortlessly, showing complete self-confidence, the dice fell only according to Rādhikā’s desire. Rādhā raised both hands, shook the dice vigorously and threw them while uttering, “daśa, daśa!” (ten, ten; or second meaning—bite, bite). One sakhī objected, “O fierce Rādhā! You should not utter these words repeatedly. Don’t You know that there is a black snake in front of You. O sakhī! Previously He has given You pain by nicely biting Your mind and lips.” Lalitā quipped, “True, but what about the black snakes of Rādhā’s eyebrows? Those snakes have already destroyed the poisonous all-pervading influence of that other black snake. Now what can that black snake do?” The sakhīs appreciated Lalitā’s words of revenge on Kṛṣṇa and laughed heartily. Noble Rādhā, however, hung Her head in embarrassment. Casting shyness aside, Rādhā then played boldly with an extra effort to win. Kiśorī played so intensely that She completely blocked Kṛṣṇa’s moves. Rādhā doubled the wager to obstruct Her lover. Kṛṣṇa could not break Rādhā’s positions. He smiled mildly to distract Her and spoke some soft, sweet words to agitate Her. Kṛṣṇa said, “O beautiful one! You have very enthusiastically increased My wager. Consider it and state it once without reducing it.” Rādhā considered, “Oh! Either way I will suffer immeasurable shame. The sakhīs will laugh among themselves and the ocean of qualities will also laugh.” As these unthinkable thoughts arose in Rādhā’s mind, She pretended not to hear Śyāma’s words. Laughing heartily, Rādhā kept playing attentively. Lotus-faced Rādhā, Her glance fixed on the game board, uttered “viduḥ, viduḥ” (they know, they know) as She shook the dice in Her hand, encircled by jingling bangles. The sakhīs said, “Look sakhī! Who knows Your desire to increase the wager of a kiss? We do not know anything, so do not be unhappy. Why are You shouting, “they know, they know?” The teasing words of the sakhīs made the red-rimmed eyes of Rādhā flutter nervously. Their words and the crooked words of Her lover combined to break Rādhā’s concentration in the game. Rādhā, as if inspired by the movements of luck, made a mistake by impulsively breaking the sequence in playing. This destroyed Her stranglehold on Kṛṣṇa’s pawns. Magnanimous Kṛṣṇa then tripled the wager. The sakhīs said, “Look, do not be proud. Our dear sakhī will certainly win!” Rādhā threw again with a great desire for victory. Although wanting to win, Rādhikā had no desire to enjoy the results. Rādhā could not defeat Kṛṣṇa, the virtual victory flag over the world. And Kṛṣṇa could not defeat Rādhā, a second flag of victory. Interestingly, Cupid was the only winner. The Divine Couple were expert in all types of arts. In the sacrifice of Cupid, Rādhā-Govinda knew the different procedures for placing and touching the pot. Rādhā-Mādhava, bewildered by the fortune of great love and attached to each other’s most auspicious qualities, attained Their hearts’ desires. Time had run out however, and They could play no more! Rādhā-Mādhava were thus compelled to

/Q: quit without finishing the game.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.247-297
-L: Sun god Worship
/Q: One vana-devī rushed into the assembly and announced, “Jaṭilā has come to the sun temple!” The sakhīs immediately stopped their blissful dice pastime, and with fear-filled eyes ran to meet Jaṭilā. Jaṭilā asked Rādhā, “O daughter-in-law! Where have You been all this time and why are You so late?” Rādhikā replied, “I went to purify myself in Mānasa Gaṅgā.” Jaṭilā: “Why don’t I see Kundalatā?” Rādhā: “She went to get the priest for conducting the pūjā.” Jaṭilā: “Why hasn’t she come till now?” Rādhā: “Look, here she comes with the brāhmaṇa.” Kundalatā arrived with the brāhmaṇa (Kṛṣṇa in disguise) and said, “O Jaṭilā! How strange! Today I could not find a brāhmaṇa anywhere in Vraja, even after searching a long time. Somehow I brought this disciple of Gargamuni from Mathurā who knows all sciences. The scholars praise Him as the best of brahmacārīs. I brought Him here with great difficulty. Please accept Him as the priest for Rādhā.” Jaṭilā addressed the so-called brāhmaṇa, “O best of the brāhmaṇas! I feel blessed just by seeing You! Please engage my daughter-in-law in worship. All my desires will then be fulfilled.” Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 15.53-58 Rādhā whispered to Viśākhā, “O sakhī! Is this Kṛṣṇa disguised as a brāhmaṇa? If it is not, then why is My heart melting? When will an altar made of moonstones start melting? It will only happen in the presence of the moon!” Lalita-mādhava 2.12 Viśākhā whispered in Rādhā’s ear, “O doe-eyed woman! Kṛṣṇa has so much love for You that He has come here disguised as a brāhmaṇa priest to worship the sun-god. It is astonishing how Kṛṣṇa has suddenly attained all the qualities of a brāhmaṇa. Look! He has discriminating intelligence to penetrate the fine points of philosophy and literature! His gentle glance emits tolerance and patience! His words are meek and humble, and His whole body radiates the gravity of a great thinker!” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.30 Kṛṣṇa, the brāhmaṇa with peaceful eyes, wore a white dhotī and held śāstra and kūśa grass in His hands. He chanted the Sāma Veda in a sweet voice and said, “My dear elder! Though it is not proper for a brahmacārī to look at women, today I will help your chaste daughter-in-law, whose body is covered in cloth, to worship the sun who can fulfill all desires.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 15.60 While initiating the pūjā, Viśvaśarma [Kṛṣṇa’s brāhmaṇa name] asked Jaṭilā, “What is the name of your daughter-in-law?” When Jaṭilā said “Rādhā,” Kṛṣṇa became struck with wonder and replied, “O! Is She that famous most qualified jewel of fortune whose ideal chastity is celebrated even in Mathurā? O old woman, you are certainly very fortunate to have such an illustrious daughter-in-law!” Turning to Rādhā, Viśvaśarma said, “You cannot perform the pūjā without following the Vedic rite of accepting the priest. Therefore, You must touch Me to engage me in this great worship of the sun.

/Q: Since I never touch women, You can just touch Me with kuśa grass while reciting the mantras.” Rādhā said, “I accept You, Viśvaśarma, whose exalted family brings auspiciousness to the entire world and who is most pure and learned, as My priest.” (inner meaning: I accept You, who are the universal pleasure giver, as My lover. You are all auspicious and expert in the arts of conjugal affairs.) Rādhā continued reciting, “I offer respects to the sun-god, the friend of the lotus who destroys the darkness with his rays and who becomes bright red in the morning and evening.” (inner meaning: I offer Myself unto My friend Kṛṣṇa, who is the lover of the Vraja-gopīs. His chest, which relieves one’s lust, is marked with a golden line and He is the all-attractive friend of the lotus-like gopīs.) Viśvaśarma [Kṛṣṇa] said, “O Rādhā! Now chant the mantra and offer arghya and pādya to please the golden-dressed sun-god who will fulfill all Your desires.” (inner meaning: Reciting the mantra, You can offer Your body to the one wearing a yellow dhotī, who will fulfill all Your desires.) Govinda- līlāmṛta 18.65-70 Viśvaśarma continued, “O fortunate girl! Now that You have worshiped the deity, You should offer arghya water to the sun-planet shining in the sky.” (inner meaning: O fortunate girl! Now that You have worshiped the deity, You may worship Your noble life’s friend, who stands before You dressed in glittering yellow garments) Lalita-mādhava 2.37 Rādhā submissively followed Viśvaśarma’s instructions and chanted the following mantra: “O magnificent sun-god, I humbly worship you. O moving eye that nourishes those beneath you, please grant the treasure of your bending sidelong glance upon this poor person. I offer my respectful obeisances to you.” (inner meaning: O Rādhā of restless eyes whom I worship in a secluded place. O girl whose luscious lips agitate Me with desire, please grant this poor person the treasure of Your crooked sidelong glances. Rādhā, You are as splendid as the sun and I offer My respectful obeisances to You.) Lalita-mādhava 2.33 Kundalatā said, “O sakhī Rādhā! The sun is now in Virgo sign. You should offer him wonderful arghya water with a beautiful blossoming lotus flower.” (inner meaning: Your friend, who is expert at enjoying amatory pleasures with many lovely maidens, stands before You. Now offer Him wonderful arghya with the beautiful blossoming lotus flower of Your smile.) Lalita-mādhava 2.38 Viśvaśarma said, “O beautiful girl, the worship of the sun-god has been executed properly. Now satisfy Your family deity by offering a handful of red flowers.” Lalita-mādhava 2.39 Jaṭilā felt very satisfied with Viśvaśarma and prayed for a boon: “O best of the brāhmaṇas! Please bless Rādhā’s husband with unlimited cows and a long life free from disease?” Viśvaśarma blessed her saying, “So be it!” Madhumaṅgala glanced at the sumptuous food offerings and said, “I will also recite some prayers to the sun-god.” Jaṭilā interrupted, “You fool! O friend of that debauchee! What are you doing here? This gentle, dark complexioned brāhmaṇa will engage my daughter-in-law in Sūrya-pūjā every day.” Viśvaśarma instructed Rādhikā, “O crest jewel of chaste women! Please recite the mantra: ‘I offer respects to the sun.’ Do parikramā of the temple and offer obeisances with Your head on the ground.”
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 15.64-68

/Q: Jaṭilā placed two golden rings and a plate of sweets before Viśvaśarma as a donation. Smiling, Viśvaśarma [Kṛṣṇa] said, “As a pure Vaiṣṇava I do not eat the remnants of the devatās. Besides, since I am a celibate brāhmaṇa boy, I do not accept food or wealth from other castes. Because I am Gargamuni’s disciple I know everything about astrology, palmistry and other sciences. We accept your love and the satisfaction of the Vrajavāsīs as the greatest reward.” Jaṭilā whispered to Kundalatā and she conveyed the message: “O brāhmaṇa Viśvaśarma! Honorable Jaṭilā wants You to read Rādhā’s palm and tell Her future.” Viśvaśarma replied, “O, We never look at the bodies of women. However, since you have pure affection for Me, I will examine Her hand from a distance. Please hold Her hand out in front of Me.” Upon observing Rādhikā’s lovely palm, Viśvaśarma started trembling, horripilating and crying in ecstasy. Viśvaśarma tried to conceal His rapture by feigning astonishment. He said, “How amazing! The auspicious signs on this girl’s palm prove that She is verily Laksmī Herself! If She casts Her merciful glance upon us, We will become fabulously wealthy. Wherever She stays becomes full of opulence, prosperity and auspiciousness.” Viśvaśarma [Kṛṣṇa] continued, “Jaṭilā, what is your son’s name?” After Jaṭilā answered, Viśvaśarma made a show of calculating his future. Viśvaśarma then voiced alarm, “O old woman Jaṭilā! Your son will face many grave obstacles during his life. They will all be nullified, however, by the influence of this chaste and saintly girl.” Jaṭilā rejoiced over the predictions, and rewarded Viśvaśarma with a pair of Rādhā’s precious jeweled rings. Subala suddenly appeared and announced, “O Viśvaśarma! Kṛṣṇa is anxiously waiting at Govardhana Hill to offer You and Madhumaṅgala some fruits and milk.” Viśvaśarma said, “I cannot eat food offered by non-brāhmaṇas. Today Gargī has invited Me and I am going there. O Madhumaṅgala! You take the sūrya-prasāda.” Madhumaṅgala said, “Hey old woman Jaṭilā! Give a donation for my reciting the svasti-vācana (auspicious invocatory mantras).” Jatīlā gave him two gold rings from her fingers. Overjoyed with the gift, Madhumaṅgala slapped his armpits repeatedly to make an amusing sound. Madhumaṅgala tied the rings and the sūrya-prasāda in the border of his garment. He then glorified Jaṭilā while jumping around gleefully. Madhumaṅgala, induced by Jaṭilā, remarked to Viśvaśarma, “If You do not accept Jaṭila’s donation, the pūjā will not be complete. Be merciful and take it. If You do not need the money, just give it to another brāhmaṇa. The charming young lady will then achieve auspiciousness and the results of Her sūrya-pūjā.” Viśvaśarma refused, so Madhumaṅgala said, “All right, I will just have to bear the burden and accept Your donation.” Laughing, he took both rings and bound them in the corner of his cloth. Jaṭilā told Viśvaśarma, “O brāhmaṇa boy! I will reward You substantially if You engage my daughter-in-law in Sūrya-pūjā whenever You come to Vṛndāvana.” Jaṭilā happily offered her obeisances to the sun god and the brāhmaṇas. Feeling blessed and satisfied, Jaṭilā escorted Rādhā and Her sakhīs home. While Rādhikā walked along the path, She repeatedly looked over Her shoulder on the pretext of

/Q: talking to Lalitā. Actually, Rādhikā was eagerly glancing toward Sūrya-deva’s temple in an effort to drink the sweet honey of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face with the cups of Her sidelong glances. Failing to quench Her thirst, however, Rādhārāṇī became sad. The golden pitcher of beautiful-eyebrowed Rādhā’s body overflowed with the pleasing milk of Śyāma’s sweet pastimes. This greatly pleased the eyes of Rādhā’s sakhīs. When the milk in the pot turned distasteful and discolored by the poison of separation, however, the sahkīs’ eyes burned in agony. The blue lotus of Kṛṣṇa’s body basked in the cooling moonbeams of Rādhikā’s blissful association. When the scorching sun of separation rose, the blue lotus withered and turned pale in despair. Kṛṣṇa felt completely dejected without Rādhikā. Subala and Madhumaṅgala encouraged Kṛṣṇa and somehow He managed to walk along the path back to the cowherd boys. The boys reeled in delight over Kṛṣṇa’s darśana and shouted, “I will touch Him first! No I will!” as they ran toward Kṛṣṇa to embrace Him. One boy said, “O Kṛṣṇa! We could not tolerate Your separation. We thought that You were hard- hearted for leaving us alone. We became downtrodden and wanted to search for You. Out of Your tender love for us, however, You returned in a few seconds.” Rādhā-Mādhava’s midday pastimes are a boundless ocean of nectar. Only a select few however can cross over or immerse themselves in that wonderful ocean. Fortunately, the favorable wind of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s mercy sprinkled just one drop of that nectar on this most fallen and untouchable one standing on the shore.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 18.73-98

+A: (3:36 p.m.—6:00 p.m.) Aparāhna-līlā - Afternoon Pastimes
/Q: O mind, worship Gauraṅga who, remembering the afternoon pastimes of Rādhā-Govinda, became inundated with waves of bliss and danced, wheeled around, lost control of His body and fainted. Mūla-sūtra: [by author] During the afternoon, Kṛṣṇa returned to Vraja along with His cows and boyfriends. The Vrajavāsīs rejoiced over Govinda’s imminent return when they heard Kṛṣṇa’s resonant flute song and observed the dust clouds raised by the hooves of the cows. The elders, children and infants stopped everything and rushed to see Kṛṣṇa. Rādhikā bathed upon returning home from Sūrya-pūjā. She then decorated Herself with sixteen types of ornaments. Rādhā lovingly cooked a few items for Kṛṣṇa and then ran out with Her sakhīs to meet Śyāma. The Vrajavāsīs were maddened with bliss as they waited by the town gate to greet the heart of their hearts. Kṛṣṇa interacted with everyone according to their relationship with Him by looking respectfully, speaking, glancing lovingly, smiling and embracing. Kṛṣṇa honored the elder cowherd men with His body, mind and words. Kṛṣṇa fell flat on the ground before His mother, His father and Rohiṇī. He cast shy glances at the sakhīs. After leading the cows into the gośālā, Kṛṣṇa took Nanda’s permission and joyfully entered His home. Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva bathed and ate a small snack. With Yaśodā’s permission, They returned to the gośālā to milk the cows along with Their friends. Meanwhile, In Yāvaṭ, Rādhā and Her sakhīs ate and then sat on the palace roof absorbed in thoughts of Śyāma. Mūla-sūtra: Rādhā cooked a variety of sweets for Kṛṣṇa’s evening meal upon returning home. Rādhikā then bathed, dressed attractively and went to see Śyāma as He returned to Vraja with His cows and cowherd boys. Śyāma’s beautiful lotus face thoroughly captivated Kiśorī’s heart. Kṛṣṇa satiated His eyes with the ambrosia of Rādhā’s smiling face as He passed by. Kṛṣṇa met Nanda Mahārāja and other paternal devotees. Mother Yaśodā bathed, dressed and fed Kṛṣṇa. Afterwards, other ladies of the house fondled Him with motherly love. May we always remember Rādhā- Mādhava’s afternoon pastimes.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 19.1
= P: Aparāhna-līlā (3:36 p.m.—4:00 p.m.)
-L: Candanakalā Sakhī relieves Rādhā
/Q: Rādhikā’s love for Kṛṣṇa was resolute, but She lost Her patience when He vanished from the corners of Her lotus eyes, which were His dwelling place. Various afflictions like sorrow forcibly attacked the city of Rādhā’s heart, threatening to destroy it. Rādhikā burned in the fever of separation from Her sweetheart. The sakhīs tried to cure Rādhā with the medicine of their comforting words; but it was useless. Śrī Rādhā felt a half a moment to be like a hundred kalpas in the absence of Her beloved Śyāma. Her parent’s home was like a waterless well and Her shyness seemed like a net made of unbreakable diamonds. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.1-2 Rādhikā said, “O sakhī with a beautiful face! Will this long day ever end? When will the evening arrive and bring the auspicious sight of Nandanandana? Kṛṣṇa’s curling locks of hair covered with the

/Q: dust upraised by the cows, His beautiful moonlike face and His handsome form will dispel the suffering felt by our eyes.” Although their hearts were also troubled, the loving sakhīs tried their best to assuage Rādhā’s distress. Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.76 The sakhīs smeared Rādhā’s body with soothing sandalwood paste. The intense fire of Her love in separation, however, made it immediately dry up and fall off. They then tried to alleviate Rādhā’s anguish by covering Her body with damp lotus leaves and stems sprinkled with camphor dust. A sakhī named Candanakalā suddenly arrived. She was completely excited with divine love. The sakhīs inquired, “O Candanakalā, where have you come from?” Candanakalā replied, “I have come from Vṛndāvana.” Sakhīs: “Why have you come here?” Candanakalā: “I have come on the order of Yaśodā, the queen of Vraja.” Sakhīs: “What is her order?” Candanakalā: “Rādhā should immediately cook a meal for Kṛṣṇa and send it to Nandagrama.” Sakhīs: “What is Kṛṣṇa doing in Vṛndāvana?” Candanakalā: “Kṛṣṇa is playing ball and joking with His friends. Śrīdāma boasted about his strength and Kṛṣṇa challenged him, ‘What are you saying Śrīdāma? Don’t you know that I can break your eardrums with a particle of My roaring. Moreover, I can crush your body to dust with My boltlike arms? If you know what is good for you, you will run away from here after hearing about My prowess.’ “Śrīdāma replied, ‘Śrīdāma, who is world famous for his strength, has been victorious and will remain victorious for time eternal. The witness is Your shoulders, which I have ridden on many times after defeating You. Yet without any thought, You speak such challenging words and show Your arrogant angry face. For no reason You have become so proud of killing those demons. ‘Everyone knows that the brāhmaṇas killed Putanā with their mantras. You claim to have slayed Aghasura, but we also entered his belly! If You say, ‘I lifted Govardhana Hill’ I will say that it went up in the air by itself, being pleased with our worship! You just held Your finger under it! I cannot understand why You are so puffed up.’ Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.3-7 “Stokakṛṣṇa said, ‘My dear friend Dāmodara! You are an expert only in eating. You have defeated Subala only because he is weak and You adopted cheating means. Do not brag about being a great fighter by such action. You have advertised Yourself as a serpent and I am the peacock who will now devour You.’ Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 4.3.12 “One cowherd boy said, ‘My dear Kṛṣṇa! May Your challenger Śrīdāma become glorious for his chivalrous activities, such as vibrating like a thundercloud and roaring like a lion. He dances around till his hair stands on end and his eagerness for fighting increases. Meanwhile, You make of big show of tightening Your belt.’ Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 4.3.16 ‘O wimpy Bhadrasena! I am Śrīdāma. Do not be afraid on seeing my arm that is as thick as an elephant’s trunk. First I will defeat Balarāma in battle, then I will beat Kṛṣṇa and finally I will deal with you.’ Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 4.3.20 Candanakalā continued, “O priya-sakhīs! Kṛṣṇa enthusiastically fought with His friends like Śrīdāma, who worship the splendid rays of Kṛṣṇa’s toenails with millions of their hearts by sprinkling Him

/Q: with the nectar drops of their proud words. As the personification of sakhya-rasa, Kṛṣṇa passed His time with His confidential friends on the bank of the Yamunā. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.8 “Kṛṣṇa told His friends, ‘Now it is time to stop playing in the forest and return to Vraja. Call the cows back to the gośālās by sounding your flutes and horns.’ “Balarāma and the young cowherds, who were saturated with sincere and friendly affection for one another, tooted their flutes, horns and pan-pipes while walking slowly to Vraja. They made the cowherding sound ‘hihī, hihī while calling the individual cows—Śavalī, Piśangī, Kālī, Nīlā, Hariṇī, Vilohinī, Dhūmalā and Suśīlā! Come here! We are going home now, so do not wander in the forest.’ “The cows, upon hearing the flute sounds which blew away the dust of the Vraja-gopis’ mounting maan, stopped meandering and started mooing as they approached the gopas. The attractive cows moved slowly due to their heavy udders, which were fatter and firmer than the forehead of a rutting elephant. Mother earth felt great bliss from the touch of their hooves, even though they were forcibly striking her surface. The cows making their way back to Vraja had filled their bellies with lots of green grass. Their bodies were robust and healthy. Their milk bags resembled full water pots. “The two young boys and Their circle of friends journeyed from the forest back to their homes. Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, looking like two baby elephants, one shining blue and the other white, spontaneously attracted the three worlds. “The black bees, mistaking them to be lotus flowers, landed on the sweet lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the destroyer of all suffering. It seemed that Vana Lakṣmī (the goddess of the forest) was crying tears mixed with her kajjala. The birds, in their fever of separation from Kṛṣṇa, beat their bodies with the hands of their wings and chirped loudly to express their pain, as if weeping. The does, their bodies afflicted with separation from their beloved, stared in the direction of Kṛṣṇa as if they had no eyelids. Stunned, they stood in one place, praying for the treasure of another glance from Kṛṣṇa. “Seeing the peacocks dragging their tails along the ground as they walked behind Kṛṣṇa, it seemed that Vana Lakṣmī’s hair had loosened in lamentation and lay scattered on the earth. Egrets and other water birds flew erratically here and there searching for Kṛṣṇa. With tears in their eyes and pitiful, choked voices, they tried to find Kṛṣṇa in every lake. The sight of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma herding the surabhi cows from front to back on the way to Vraja defeated the splendor of two captains, one black and one silver, steering a gleaming white ship. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.8-20 “It appeared that mother earth had turned her whole body into dust in order to embrace the body of Kṛṣṇa and the cows. How else can an intelligent person obtain such happiness and full satisfaction? The pure, colorful dust kicked up by the cows’ hooves and sprinkled on Kṛṣṇa’s curly locks by the gentle breeze looked like pollen on the bodies of bees. Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful black hair hung down below His white turban, which was decorated with leaves, flowers and the dust raised by the cow’s hooves. “The Vaijayantī garland on Kṛṣṇa’s chest, now glorified with the foot dust of the cows, seemed to smile with the beauty of its flowers as it spread its attractive pollen in all directions. Kṛṣṇa’s famous Kaustubha jewel, though covered by dust, sparkled even more brilliantly. It appeared the Kaustubha was attempting to increase the purity of its fresh, inimitable luster.” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.24-27 Candanakalā Sakhī revived Rādhikā by throwing the sapharī fish of Her life airs from the dry land of separation from Her Priyatama back into the nectar river of Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes. Candanakalā engaged Rādhā in preparing some special sweets requested by mother Yaśodā, whose heart melted in

/Q: affection for her son. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.9 Aparāhna-līlā (4:00 p.m.—4:24 p.m.)
-L: Rādhā cooks Kṛṣṇa’s favorite five sweets
/Q: For Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure, Rādhā made amṛta-keli tarts by combining ripe bananas, wheat flour, dahl flour, finely shredded coconut, pepper, condensed milk, cardamom, cloves, nutmeg and cinnamon. The mixture was fried in ghee, spiced with a pinch of camphor and then dipped in boiling sugar syrup. Govinda-līlāmṛta 19.50 Kiśorī prepared Kṛṣṇa’s favorite karpūra-keli by first adding starter to boiling milk to make yogurt. The yogurt was mixed with sal rice powder, sugar, ground coconut, ripe bananas, nutmeg, cloves and cardamom. Rādhā kneaded the dough until bubbles appeared. It was rolled into balls, covered with mung dahl powder and fried in ghee. The fried balls were then dropped into a sweet sauce made from condensed milk and honey spiked with a pinch of camphor. Rādhārāṇī prepared pīyuṣa-granthi-pālikā sweets by using the same ingredients mentioned above. This time the mixture was formed in the shape of jalebis, fried in ghee and soaked in pañcāmṛta. Rādhā made anaṅga-guṭikā by mixing sugar and cream, along with rice, coconut, nutmeg, cloves, pepper and a pinch of camphor. Everything was ground together with bananas and cardamom, molded into bite-sized balls and fried in ghee. Kiśorī made śīdhu-vilāsa sweets by folding white flour into milk. Rādhā added smashed ripe bananas, nutmeg, black pepper and boiled the complete mixture in sugar water. A topping of fresh honey and camphor was poured over it. Rādhikā skillfully prepared these five sweets that defeated the taste of nectar. Kṛṣṇa always ate them with great relish and affection. Amṛta-keli, karpūra-keli and pīyuṣa-granthi-pālikā were famous delicacies in Vrajabhumi. Anaṅga-guṭikā and śīdhu-vilāsa were two appetizers Kṛṣṇa enjoyed while drinking honey wine during His midnight pastimes. Rādhārāṇī made gaṅgājala laḍdus using cloves, cardamom, camphor, black pepper and sugar. She made varieties of laḍdus. Rādhikā made sara-pūpikā [cream filled pancake] from thick cream, ground coconut, sugar, cloves, cardamom and camphor cooked in ghee. After finishing the cooking, Rādhārāṇī bathed and donned a bright red dress. The sakhīs anointed Rādhā’s body with musk and other unguents, tied Her braid and drew colorful designs on Her limbs. The sakhīs used sandalwood paste tinted with kuṅkuma to apply the full moon-shaped tilaka on Rādhikā’s forehead. The dot of musk gracing Rādhā’s chin resembled a baby bee. A fragrant flower garland adorned Rādhā’s chest. Rādhā twirled a blue lotus in Her hand. A large pearl dangled beneath Rādhā’s nose, eyeliner encircled Her eyes, flower decorations accented the beauty of Her black tresses and silken ropes encircled Her waist. Rādhā’s lips turned red from chewing pān. They draped flowers over Rādhā’s ears and painted red lac on Her dainty feet. The sakhīs put a jewel in Rādhā’s hair part and another one on Her forehead. They put on Rādhikā’s belt, bracelets, earrings, bangles, foot ornaments, toe rings, chokers, broaches, armbands, necklaces, rings and anklets. Govinda-līlāmṛta 19.51-60 Aparāhna-līlā (4:24 p.m.—4:48 p.m.)
-L: Rādhā praises Kṛṣṇa’s flute

/Q: At the completion of Her dressing, Rādhikā said, “O sakhīs! The afternoon stretches on for a thousand millennia and still it is not over. It seems the cruel creator has turned the afternoon into a grinding stone to crush My grain-like heart.” Rādhā’s face wilted with sorrow and streams of tears flowed from Her eyes. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtaṁ 16.12 The gopīs said, “When Mukunda vibrates the flute pressed to His lips, stopping its holes with His tender fingers, He rests His left cheek on His left arm and makes His eyebrows dance.” SB 10.35.2 Rādhā stated, “When Kṛṣṇa makes music with His flute, a shower of nectar flows from His face. The cows drink the nectar with the tongues of their upraised ears. Their natural tongues become stunned and stop munching grass. Though we gopīs and the cows have entered the same state by hearing the flute, there is some difference. The cows confidently behold Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful face without stop, but we do not know in which yuga we will see His face. Gopāla-pūrva-campū 17.46-47 “O sakhī! It is simply astonishing! Even though they are dumb animals, the wives of the kṛṣṇa-sāra deer can freely approach Kṛṣṇa along with their husbands whenever they hear His sweet flute song. Upon spotting Kṛṣṇa, they stand like statues and worship Kṛṣṇa with their moistened eyes. On the other hand, We are civilized human beings, respected by everyone, and We live in the famous land of Vraja along with our husbands because of having attained kṛṣṇa-prema. The does are not at all qualified like us, yet they can easily go to Kṛṣṇa along with their husbands. We must be very sinful and unfortunate since We cannot do that. Gopāla-pūrva-campū 17.51-52 “The rivers become bewildered whenever they hear Śyāma’s flute resonant with divine sound. They stop flowing and tremble with joy. They flood their banks while shouting ecstatically in the form of warbling water birds. Washing overland, they touch Kṛṣṇa’s feet and offer gifts of lotus flowers with the hands of their waves. The rivers are the wives of the ocean, yet they break all boundaries to go to Kṛṣṇa. They must have accumulated heaps of pious credits. We are most unfortunate, however, and cannot compare with them at all! Somehow, we must be detached from happiness and distress! “Kṛṣṇa and the clouds share the same color. Therefore, they are friends and help each other. Kṛṣṇa enlivens the clouds by playing the mallāra rāga (monsoon melody) on His flute, and the clouds shield Kṛṣṇa from the scorching sunshine. “O sakhī, look! Even though the clouds are insentient entities located far above the earth, they serve Kṛṣṇa out of love with their shade and water. We are so unfortunate! We offered our lives to Kṛṣṇa, thinking We would be protected. Without Kṛṣṇa’s service, our lives are ruined! Gopāla-pūrva-campū 17.57-60 “The flute certainly possesses heaps of piety! Though it is male, the flute shamelessly sings as it relishes the nectar of Śyāma’s lips, which are the avowed treasure of the Vraja-gopīs. Kṛṣṇa vibrates sweet melodies on His flute. The rivers swell with pride and the trees on their banks, the relatives of the bamboo flute, shed tears of joy in the form of honey. In the form of a respectable woman, it is difficult to attain Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, I pray for a bamboo body because Kṛṣṇa is very attached to His flute and greatly relishes pressing His lips to it. If I accept a bamboo body while keeping My consciousness, Kṛṣṇa will understand that I have turned into wood due to separation from Him.” Rādhikā, in the frenzy of Her bhāva, considered, “O makara earrings! You kiss Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks. O muralī! You taste the nectar of Mādhava’s lips. O garland! You embrace Govinda’s limbs. Your actions are proper since you are all faultless. However, We have been cheated of Our desired object

/Q: by the wretched play of fate!” Gopāla-pūrva-campū 17.64-66 Aparāhna-līlā (4:48 p.m.—6:00 p.m.)
-L: The sakhīs receive the returning Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Rādhā’s face withered while speaking and then She cried profusely. Lalitā, feeling sorry over Rādhā’s grief, quickly found a remedy to cure Rādhā’s separation. Clutching Rādhā’s hand, Lalitā took Her to the palace rooftop. Lalitā pointed toward the east and exclaimed, “Rādhikā, look! The dust of Kṛṣṇa’s cows is rising in the distance. Soon You will cross the bitter ocean of despair!” Lalitā’s words submerged Rādhā in an ocean of bliss. Rādhā responded, “O auspicious one! It is not dust but camphor powder to cool off My burning eyes, coming from far away. O sakhī! Perhaps it is a medicine to revive a dying person. That dust has led My life airs, which were about to depart, back to My heart and renewed My life.” Just then a cool breeze blew from the east. Rādhikā said, “O Lalitā! I am very fortunate that the merciful eastern wind, carrying the sweat drops of your beloved’s lotus face, is reviving Me! Not only in name, but also with its qualities the wind is the life air of the world. “O sakhī! Vrajendranandana, the ocean of prema, is remembering My miserable condition of separation and quickly approaching Me, keeping the cows in front. How can Śyāma move swiftly when His gait is naturally slow like that of a lusty bull? How can Kṛṣṇa come near while He is still on a distant foot path? O sakhī! Seeing the dust from the cows gave Me hope of living. Now that Kṛṣṇa is delayed, however, My life airs are about to depart.” Lalitā responded to Rādhā’s misery, “O Rādhā, why are You lamenting? Your lover has almost arrived. Śyāma wears spotless tilaka. The restless curly locks hanging over His forehead are surrounded by humming bees. The fragrance of His tulasī garland pervades all directions. Kṛṣṇa’s crimson turban is slightly tilted to one side and topped with a peacock feather. Mādhava will be here in a few moments to relieve all Your distress.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.13-17 The moon-faced gopīs, with beautiful white teeth, heard Mādhava’s enchanting flute and became overcome by lust. Their voices faltered and their clothes loosened. Released from their sorrow, they ran out of their homes. Govinda-līlāmrṭa 19.86 The Vraja-gopīs were inundated with obstacles arising from their confusion. Nevertheless, they disregarded everything and rushed to where the cow’s mooing mixed with the vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. Some gopīs fixed their ornaments in the wrong places on their bodies. Others forgot to tie their belts and hair. Some sakhīs stayed inside their homes, stunned and motionless like statues. A few gopīs fainted and fell on the ground. The faces of a few sakhīs who had fainted were washed with tears and saliva dripping from their mouths. Their friends picked up their bodies and dragged them along while shouting, “Sakhī! Come take darśana of the Lord of our lives, Śrī Kṛṣṇa!” Bṛhad- bhāgavatāmṛtaṁ 2.6.50-52 Rādhikā said, “I see Nandanandana coming! I hear the contented mooing of the cows and the pleasing sound of Śyāma’s flute, which attracts all the damsels of Vraja. The unique notes of Kṛṣṇa’s flute arranged in sweet rāgas and modulations cannot be found anywhere in the universe!” Bṛhad- bhāgavatāmṛtaṁ 2.6.46 One sakhī said, “Rādhā! Śyāma’s enchanting flute song is pulling all the girls of Vraja from their

/Q: homes and stimulating love in their hearts. Let us deceive our superiors by telling them we are going to pick flowers. Rādhā’s patience disappeared before Her excitement to see Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā then hurried downstairs with Her sakhīs. Śyāmalā-sakhī heard Kṛṣṇa’s flute and said, “Sakhī Bakulamālā, you need not decorate my ears with flowers anymore. They are already ornamented with Kṛṣṇa’s distinctive flute song! O sakhī, I fall at your feet. Let me go to Śyāma. My fever will be relieved only by the Kṛṣṇa cloud. “O sakhī! Do not apply black mascara to my eyes. That dark complexioned lover is now coming from the forest to relieve my fever of separation! Now I will hold Him to my eyes!” Śyāmalā threw off all of her ornaments and dashed away to meet Rādhikā. As Kṛṣṇa neared the village of Yāvaṭ, the sakhīs told their group leaders, “O Bhadrā, do not delay!” “Candrāvalī! Give up your depression and come see Kṛṣṇa!” “Dhanyā, forget about your complacency!” “Kamalā, hurry from your home!” “O Pālī! Why are you lamenting? Quickly come and be revived by the nectar of Hari’s beautiful limbs!” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.19-22 The Vrajavāsīs waited in great anticipation for Kṛṣṇa’s return with the cows. First they saw the dust clouds in the distance created by the hooves of the cows striking the earth. Then they heard the bellowing of the cows and saw the cowherd boys coming behind the cows. Finally, Nanda and Yaśodā heard the flute song and beheld the bright blue effulgence surrounding the jewel-like prince of Vṛndāvana. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.2 The cows, seized with the desire to lick their calves, tried to run but their heavy milk bags checked their forward movement. Their eyes rolled in ecstasy from the joy they felt in hearing Kṛṣṇa’s flute. The cows ambled into the village mooing happily with choked voices. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.3 Kṛṣṇa called the names of His cows with an especially sweet flute tune: “O Muktā, Nandinī, Candinī, Indutilakā, Kastūrī, Karpūrikā, Piṅgā, Raṅgiṇī, Dhumalā, Dhavalikā, Kiṅjalkikā, Śyāmā, Ketakī, Candrikā, Śavalikā, Kāśmīrikā, Campakā!” Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 1.1 The cows naturally displayed affection toward their calves but they showed more love toward Kṛṣṇa. The cows stepped forward a bit, and then repeatedly turned their heads to look at Govinda, fearing separation from their beloved friend. Lalita-mādhava 1.29 Kṛṣṇa played His flute to stop the cows at the last lake before entering Nandagrama. Kṛṣṇa induced them to drink the clear water. Śyāma then divided the herd and counted the cows on a necklace of multi-colored gems. Kṛṣṇa rejoiced if all the cows were present. If even one cow was missing, Kṛṣṇa would call her name with His flute. The stray cow would immediately return to the herd and proceed to Vraja. Govinda-līlāmṛtam 19.77-78 The curly locks on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead were grayish in color from the dust upraised by the cow’s hooves. Kṛṣṇa’s earrings swung attractively as He walked. A peacock feather and a cluster of skillfully arranged, dangling aśoka flowers adorned Śyāma’s slightly tilted turban. The yellow pollen from Kṛṣṇa’s withered lotus flower ear ornaments spread across His perspiration soaked cheeks. The musical notes of Mādhava’s flute mixed with the sweet sound of His ankle bells as He strolled into Vraja surrounded by His friends, keeping Balarāma in front. The Vrajavāsīs beheld Śyāma as the embodiment of blissful love. All conversations centered on Kṛṣṇa as the day ended. The Vrajavāsīs, upon seeing the dust from the

/Q: cows, immediately talked excitedly about Kṛṣṇa’s return. The lowing of the cows was the sure sign of Śyāma’s arrival. The enthralling vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute slipped into the gopīs’ ears to steal the jewels of their minds. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 13.26-28 As Giridhārī, beautifully blue as a rain cloud, walked behind the cows, the earth trembled beneath His lotus feet. Kṛṣṇa’s turban ornaments shook and the pollen from His long garland, surrounded by bees, fell over His body. Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha gem flashed as it bounced up to His charming bent neck. Alaṅkāra-kaustubhaḥ 9.3 The peacock feather, forest flowers and the dust raised by the cows’ hooves made Śyāma’s hair even more elegant. Kṛṣṇa’s friends sang His glories. Kṛṣṇa responded by casting charming glances and smiles while vibrating His flute. The gopīs, with eyes full of excitement, stepped forward to meet Śyāma. SB 10.15.42 Balarāma, Subala and the other boys went ahead to Nandīśvara. Kṛṣṇa waited at the back of the throng to meet privately with the beloved gopīs. The cows galloped and cried out to their calves as they neared the village. Balarāma and the boys’ appearance immediately delivered their mothers from the ocean of lamentation. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.23 Meanwhile, the eyes of the Vraja-gopīs, whose hearts had dried up in their longing for conjugal rasa, soared like bees to land on the immaculate lotus of their lover’s face. The gopīs stood on the jeweled rooftops of their homes, fixing their eyes on Kṛṣṇa’s face. The collective glances of the lotus-eyed gopīs looked like a shower of blue lotus petals piling one upon the other. Only Cupid and the gopīs could perceive the astonishing sweetness arising from Syama’s face on being struck by the gopīs’ glances. Kṛṣṇa’s counter glances broke the irresistible subtle arrows of the gopīs’ glances in mid air. Still the tips of the gopīs’ arrows pierced Kṛṣṇa’s chest. The exchange of love-laden looks enhanced the nectar of their mutual attraction. The gopīs, out of fear of their elders, glanced briefly at Kṛṣṇa but their ecstatic love did not diminish in the least. Kṛṣnāhnika-kaumudī 5.36-40 A colorful flower garland swayed on Kṛṣṇa’s chest as He slowly moved through the village of Yāvaṭ. Śyāma, with His restless, lazy glances filled with the delight of love, threw the slender sakhīs into a whirlpool of erotic bliss. The ocean of natural, youthful beauty swelling in Śyāma’s body appeared to be playing ball with the gopīs’ minds by throwing them back and forth. Kṛṣṇa’s pervasive luster made the pathway into Vraja look like a forest of blooming blue lotuses, wherein the bees of the gopīs’ eyes performed a sacrifice to drink madhura rasa. Kṛṣṇa’s ankle bells jingled loudly as He sauntered into Yāvaṭ with His intimate friends.
-L: The meeting of Rādhā-Mādhava
/Q: Śyāmalā, seeing Kṛṣṇa nearing the grove where Rādhā was hiding, said, “O Kiśorī! You need not maintain Your shyness out of pride. The lord of the cows (paśupati) has arrived. Behold Mādhava with Your blossoming lotus eyes. If You worship Paśupati (Śiva) like this, Cupid will no longer attack You. Such auspicious opportunities come very rarely.” Rādhā replied, “O Śyāmalā! Why don’t you quickly run there and worship Mahesh (Śiva) by offering Him the two lotus buds arising on your chest? O fair-faced one! If your desires are fulfilled the instant you worship Him, I will sink in a joyful ocean of nectar.”

/Q: Śyāmalā, a natural joker, said to Lalitā, “O sakhī! Do not lie to me! Why did the young male bee leave the blossoming creepers and start rolling around in confusion?” Lalitā answered, “O Śyāmā! You are speaking the truth. The young honeybee has fallen into a whirlpool within the river of the incomparable fragrance coming from the mālatī vine and he cannot move anymore.” The gopīs’ rapturous riddles refreshed Kṛṣṇa’s ears like a cool stream from a lake of love. For a moment, Śyāma saw Kiśorī’s lotus face with the dancing wagtail birds of Her eyes, but again it became hidden among the flowering creepers. Witnessing that, Giridhārī succumbed to anxiety while thinking, “Alas! The thirsty cakora bird of My eyes just opened its beak to drink the nectar of the rising moon. O creator! You are a damn fool and a big offender for offering the nectar moon to My eyes and then quickly taking it away.” Meanwhile, Rādhikā thought, “O shyness, you do not have to leave My whole body. Just leave the corners of My eyes for a while, so I can lick the nectar of Śyāma’s face at least once. O cloud of bliss, be pleased with Me. Do not obstruct My vision! O Cupid, I fall at your feet. Do not make My body tremble. How can I make such a bold move of poking My head out to see Śyāma?” At that moment, Rādhā’s sakhīs cleverly pulled Her from behind the bushes saying, “A respectable lady should not stay alone, so let us go home.” Now Rādhā was fully visible to Śyāma. Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 16.24-32 Subala beheld Rādhikā’s lovely divine form and described Her sixteen attractive features to Kṛṣṇa: “O sakhā! Rādhā’s beauty is purity itself! A shining jewel rests in Her nose and a blue dress beautifies Her limbs. Just see Rādhā’s dazzling diamond waist belt, Her ear ornaments, Her braid, the flowers in Her hair and the sandalwood paste smeared on Kiśorī’s limbs. Rādhā wears a flower garland, twirls a lotus in Her hand and keeps pān in Her lotus mouth. Rādhārāṇī has tilaka on Her forehead, a musk dot on Her golden chin and mascara lining Her charming blue eyes. There are intricate designs on Rādhā’s cheeks and red lac on Her lovely lotus feet. “The following twelve ornaments, all fashioned from gold, embellish Śrīmatī’s stunning form. They appear like a great host of shining suns to proclaim Rādhikā’s immaculate beauty. Rādhā wears a diamond crest-jewel, earrings, a waist belt, a brooch and choker, ear pins, bracelets, finger and toe rings, a radiant star-like necklace, arm bands and jeweled anklets.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 4.9-10 As Kṛṣṇa walked on the path, one gopī secretly worshiped Him with the playful movements of her vine-like eyebrows, a second one with her sidelong glances and another with the moonlight of her smiles. However, it was on Rādhā’s face, attractive with indifference and bursting with pride, that Kṛṣṇa’s shy, amorous glances fell. All glories to Kaṁsāri’s (Kṛṣṇa) shy glances! Padyāvalī 259 Rādhā-Mādhava admired each other with restless darting eyes. Amazingly, the Triveni manifested there as the red Sarasvatī stream of Śyāma’s glances, the blue Yamunā of Radhika’s looks and the white Gaṅgā portion of both Their eyes. The elephants of Rādhā-Mādhava’s hearts immersed themselves in that Triveni, which made the lotus eyes of the gopīs fully bloom. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.33 Rādhikā pierced Kṛṣṇa’s heart, His most sensitive spot, with the arrows of Her sidelong glances. When the other gopīs shot the arrows of their glances, however, Kṛṣṇa remained unharmed and unaffected. Kṛṣṇa bathed in the nectarean rivers of the smiles of all Vraja’s maidens. However, this

/Q: did not satisfy Śyāma as much as a single drop of the nectar emanating from the moonbeams of Rādhā’s gentle smile. Govinda-līlāmṛta 19.92-93 The rasika Divine Couple thus swooned in ecstasy upon meeting on the road. Lalitā and the other sakhīs waited a few minutes before anxiously leading Rādhā home. Subala and other sakhās took Kṛṣṇa to Nandagrāma. Rādhā-Mādhava’s helpful friends comforted them by saying, “When the sun sets You two will meet again!” Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of love for His parents and the very form of their life airs, soon arrived home. Viśākhā sent Tulasī-mañjarī to Yaśodā with Kṛṣṇa’s favorite pīyūṣa-baṭikā sweets. Losing sight of Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā returned home in a frenzied state of separation. Rādhā wept in grief, saying, “O Viśākhā! That shameless womanizer forcefully accosted Me on the road, desiring to put His hand on My undergarments. Did you see that, O clever one? Although I cried loudly, that ravisher of maidens would not let Me go! Quickly call Jatila and bring her here!” Rādhikā, lamenting madly, Her eyes half-opened, trembling, covered with perspiration, burning and fatigued, became astonished when She found Herself lying on a bed of flowers. Devastated by love, Rādhā inquired from Her friends in a faltering voice: “O sakhīs! Where is My lover? What happened on the road? Am I lying on a flowerbed in a kuñja with My Priyatama or in the house of My in-laws? Is it morning, evening or night? Am I asleep or awake? Please tell Me!” The sakhīs answered, “Lotus-eyed Rādhā! You have just come from the pleasure garden. Your beloved went home after satisfying You in a solitary grove. Kṛṣṇa is now soothing His parents’ pangs of separation. Later tonight, Kṛṣṇa will meet You again and make Your lotus eyes bloom.” The lake of Vraja, which had dried up in the scorching sun of separation from Śyāma, had again filled up with bliss from the ecstatic downpour from the Kṛṣṇa cloud. The lotus faces of the Vrajavāsīs blossomed with joy once more.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 16.34-40

+A: (6:00 p.m.—8:24 p.m.) Sāyāhna-līlā - Dusk Pastimes
/Q: After bathing and eating, Gauracandra filled with prema as He meditated on Rādhā-Govinda. Gaurāṅga performed saṅkīrtana with His confidential associates while dramatizing the dusk pastimes of Rādhā-Govinda. Gaurasundara drenched Himself in vraja-bhāva. His long hair stood erect like the stamens of a kadamba flower and His tears flowed like the Gaṅgā as He roared the holy names of the Lord in ecstatic love. Mūla-sūtra: At dusk, Rādhā sent some sakhīs to Nandagrama with sweets for Kṛṣṇa’s dinner. The sakhīs returned and pleased Rādhā by bringing Kṛṣṇa’s remnants and news of His activities. Rādhā happily ate along with Her dear companions. Meanwhile, Govinda bathed and dressed in charming attire. Mother Yaśodā pampered Him with excessive motherly love. Kṛṣṇa milked the cows and frolicked with His friends. Returning to the palace, Kṛṣṇa relished the evening meal with His relatives. May we always remember the dusk pastimes of Rādhā-Govinda.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 20.1
= P: Sāyāhna-līlā (6:00 p.m.—6:24 p.m.)
-L: The attractive features of Kṛṣṇa
/Q: One evening, the celestial ladies riding in their airplanes hovered over Vraja, conversing among themselves: “O friend! Since Kṛṣṇa and the sun planet are both effulgent and friendly to the lotuses, the creator has placed them on a scale to compare them. Kṛṣṇa resides on earth but the tawny sun has risen in the sky because he is insignificant in comparison. Whenever two things are weighed, the heavier item goes down and the lighter one rises. O friend! The creator has shown his foolishness by comparing them. Is there anyone who would compare a mustard seed to gold? “O friend! The creator is so foolish that he compares dissimilar objects. The sun shines in the day but Kṛṣṇa shines in the day and night. The sun is merely seen by the eyes, but when Kṛṣṇa is seen He causes tears of joy to pour from the eyes. The sun reveals varṇāśrama-dharma to humans, but Kṛṣṇa reveals prema-dharma to all moving and non-moving creatures. “The sun has harsh rays (kara) but Kṛṣṇa’s gentle rays (kara: hands) are like an ocean of sweetness. The sun has thousands of go (rays), but Kṛṣṇa has millions of go (cows). The sun only removes the material darkness, but Kṛṣṇa removes the darkness of illusion. The sun’s beauty is often covered by the clouds, whereas Kṛṣṇa’s beauty defeats that of a cloud. “In name only can the sun remove the cakravāka couples’ fear of separation at sunset by touching them with his kara (rays). Kṛṣṇa, however easily removes the gopīs’ pangs of separation by placing His kara (hands) on their cakravāka-like breasts. During the day, the sun blesses the earth with auspiciousness and then sets. With the touch of His lotus feet and His transcendental pastimes, however, Kṛṣṇa brings auspiciousness to the earth both day and night. At the end of the day, the sun goes to satisfy the western direction. Kṛṣṇa, who is a mine of incomparable qualities, returns home at dusk to satisfy the desires of Nanda and Yaśoda and thus disappears from the eyes of us unfortunate demigoddesses.” Though the demigoddesses derided him, the sun took it as nectar for his ears. They praised him for

/Q: going to the western horizon. However, their words actually meant that Kṛṣṇa would satisfy His mother and father. Sheer ignorance made the sun attached to their false eulogy. As Śyāma strolled through the streets of the town, the demigoddesses, moving in the sky, showered Him with flowers moistened by their tears. When Kṛṣṇa glanced upward, the Vraja-gopīs standing on the roof tops of their palaces thought Kṛṣṇa was looking at them. Trembling in delight, they praised their good fortune. There is no fault in this, for sometimes the innocence of young girls creates bliss in their hearts. Entering Nanda’s palace, Kṛṣṇa submerged Himself in the nectar ocean of His parent’s love. The sun, on the other hand, sank into the salt-water ocean as a penance to attain Kṛṣṇa’s darśana once again. Meanwhile, Rādhā burned in the fever of Kṛṣṇa’s separation. The sakhīs tried to relieve Rādhā with applications of cooling camphor, sandalwood paste, fragrant uśīra grass, fresh leaves, water lilies and lotus pollen. But it was useless! Tulasī-mañjarī unexpectedly arrived from Nandīśvara. On Lalitā’s instruction, Tulasī sprinkled Rādhā’s ears with drops of nectar in the form of kṛṣṇa-līlā.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 17.1-7
-L: Tulasī relieves Rādhikā
/Q: Doe-eyed Rādhikā regained consciousness, hastily got up and said, “O sakhī! Today, My afflicted desert-like ears have become fortunate by experiencing an unprecedented shower of nectar in My dream that cooled Me off and made Me happy.” Lalitā said, “O fair faced Rādhā! You woke by hearing about the sweet pastimes of Your lover told by Tulasī who just came from Yaśodā’s palace.” Rādhā said, “O Tulasī, please tell me more charming news about Kṛṣṇa in order to stimulate My consciousness?” Tulasī obeyed Rādhā’s command and narrated Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes at dusk: “O sakhī Rādhā! When Kṛṣṇa reached the town gate, Nanda Mahārāja extended his arms to embrace Him. Nanda’s body became stunned in bliss and studded with thrill bumps. When Nanda sat his son on his lap, Kṛṣṇa appeared like an incomparable blue lotus flower in a lake on Mount Kailāsa. “Nanda Baba lifted the edge of Kṛṣṇa’s turban, smelled His head and bathed his son in tears of love. Nanda affectionately pressed His face to Kṛṣṇa’s. It looked like a spotless autumn cloud covering the moon, which had removed the affliction of heat with his cool rays. “Yaśodā, her face dried in grief, spent the evening pacing in and out of the palace, worrying about Kṛṣṇa’s delay in returning home. As soon as Yaśodā beheld her dearly beloved boy, she released a Yamunā river of tears from her eyes and a Gaṅgā river of milk from her breasts. “Yaśodā embraced Kṛṣṇa and felt stunned in joy. Her voice choked up so she could not inquire about Kṛṣṇa’s well-being. Nor could she see Kṛṣṇa because her eyes were awash with tears. Rohiṇī performed ārātrika to Kṛṣṇa by waving a small golden ghee lamp before Him. Rohiṇī held Gopāla and sat Him on Yaśodā’s lap. “O sakhī! A doubt arose upon seeing Kṛṣṇa sitting on His mother’s lap. Was Kṛṣṇa the moon sitting on the lap of His birthplace, the nectar ocean of parental affection? Was Kṛṣṇa the king of love-jewels sitting in His own mine? Was Kṛṣṇa a sapphire ornamenting a doll, tinted blue by His effulgence and smeared with the musk of affection, placed nicely on her lap by fate?
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 17.8-14

-L: Yaśodā’s affection for Kṛṣṇa
/Q: “Kṛṣṇa, while held in the lap of the ecstasy stunned Yaśodā, said, ‘O mother! I am already sitting on your lap! Why don’t you look at Me instead of showering Me with tears?’ Gopāla wiped the tears from Yaśodā’s face. This tender expression made Yaśodā feel like a female swan floating on a lake of happiness. Yaśodā lovingly fondled Kṛṣṇa and washed the dust from His body with her flowing breast milk. “The goddess of motherly love saw no end to the incomparable waves of Yaśodā’s bliss. Therefore, she restored Yaśodā’s awareness of her maternal duties by engaging her in massaging Kṛṣṇa’s body with her lotus hands. She also engaged the maidservants in anointing and bathing Kṛṣṇa. “Yaśodā said, ‘O vatsa (calf-like child), O abode of pure love! I worry so much about You when You go to the forest to tend the cows. O moon-faced child, You are not merciful to me. O lotus of Your family! Even once, You have not taken me to the forest with You. “‘O child of merciful heart! Though the long day has finished and Your father called You several times, You did not come home. Your friends worry upon observing Your weakness due to hunger and thirst. Still You tolerate it and do not come home. Why should a mother continue to maintain her hard and useless life?’ “Madhumaṅgala responded to Yaśodā’s distress, ‘O mother! My fickle friend Kṛṣṇa becomes absorbed in playing with His balāli (boyfriends or girlfriends) and completely forgets Himself, what to speak of you? I am the only one among Kṛṣṇa’s friends whose mind is controlled. O mother! If I had not prevented Him today, Kṛṣṇa would not have come home even at dusk!’ “Yaśodā said, ‘O brāhmaṇa boy! What you say is true. Every day I see fingernail scratches on Kṛṣṇa’s body, but the sharp-nailed boys do not heed my admonitions. Whenever they wrestle, they forcibly scratch Kṛṣṇa’s body, which is more tender than a blue lotus flower. Alas! What should I do to stop these naughty boys?’” After Tulasī related these pastimes, She said, “O sakhī Rādhā! Following Yaśodā’s instructions, I helped rub oil on Kṛṣṇa’s body when Rohiṇī went to the kitchen. Yaśodā, Paurṇamāsī, Kilimbā, Mukharā, Gārgī and other elderly ladies fondled Kṛṣṇa with great affection.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 17.15-21
= P: Sāyāhna-līlā (6:24 p.m.—6:48 p.m.)
-L: Kṛṣṇa’s bath
/Q: Tulasī continued, “Yaśodā stayed awhile in the palace courtyard carefully instructing the young house servants dedicated to Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. One servant, in extreme exhilaration, took Kṛṣṇa’s horn, flute and stick. A second servant removed Kṛṣṇa’s garland and another fortunate one removed Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments. One servant took off Kṛṣṇa’s turban and belt and brushed the dust from His limbs. “Another one blissfully cleansed Śyāma’s face and feet with a piece of cloth and then combed His hair. Other skillful and devoted servants smiled slightly as they gently massaged Kṛṣṇa’s body from head to toe with colored perfumed oils. One servant, learned in the ways of love, anointed Kṛṣṇa’s resplendent body with a mixture of sandalwood, kuṅkuma and concentrated camphor. One servant rinsed Kṛṣṇa’s hair with aromatic āmalaki juice and bathed Him in sandal-scented water.

/Q: “One affectionate servant dried Kṛṣṇa’s body with soft white towels. He used a damp cloth to wring out the water from Kṛṣṇa’s hair. After removing Kṛṣṇa’s wet bathing garment, one servant dressed the Lord in a comfortable yellow dhotī. He presented an attractive, diaphanous yellow cādara to cover Śyāma’s broad chest. Another servant crowned Kṛṣṇa’s head with an elegant white turban. One servant drew the finest tilaka of scented sandalwood on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead. He then smeared Kṛṣṇa’s body with a fine ointment of haricandana mixed with camphor. “One fortunate boy decorated Kṛṣṇa’s graceful limbs with the appropriate jewel inlaid ornaments and tied gem studded gold bangles on His lotus feet. Kṛṣṇa clutched the right hand of a dear friend in His left and sauntered into the dining hall. Removing His jeweled slippers, Kṛṣṇa humbly and affectionately bowed before Nanda Mahārāja. Before Kṛṣṇa sat down, Nanda lovingly embraced Him and smelled His head. Kṛṣṇa took His father’s permission to sit on the royal seat. “Shortly later, Balarāma, having been served for a long time by His personal assistants, appeared and offered respects to Nanda Mahārāja. The King of Vraja entered a boundless ocean of joy by warmly embracing His beloved Balarāma.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.54-62
-L: Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma’s meal
/Q: “Rohiṇī, after expertly preparing the evening meal for Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, came out of the kitchen and announced, “Mother Yaśodā, the cooking is ready!” The excited young servant girls, taking their cue from Yaśodā, happily placed the plates, water jugs and jeweled seats in their proper places. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.63-64 “Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and Madhumaṅgala bathed, dressed and applied unguents. Then they quickly came to the stately dining hall. Mother Yaśodā seated them and happily served fragrant cold water, tasty sweets and three kinds of foods to be chewed, sucked and licked. “Yaśodā served the sīdhukelī and other sweet cakes cooked by Rādhārāṇī, while saying, ‘O boys, these are your favorite dishes so eat with gusto!’ The boys’ five senses submerged in the nectar ocean of the sweets’ form, fragrance, taste and softness. “Madhumaṅgala bellowed while munching his food, ‘O mother! If one smells these cakes, he will disregard heaven and liberation. Fie on the creator for not giving me an unlimited belly! Furthermore, I consider anyone who says, “I don’t want any more sweets,” to be the worst offender.’ Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 17.23-25 “Kṛṣṇa and the other boys laughed at Madhumaṅgala’s jokes and made each other laugh as they ate and drank. Upon finishing their meal, they did ācamana and relaxed on luxurious beds. Govinda- līlāmṛta 12.15 “Kṛṣṇa and Balarama’s clothing and ornaments had become spoiled from eating, so They exchanged them for fresh ones. The divine boys carefully washed Their feet and freshened Their mouths with spices.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.72
= P: Sāyāhna-līlā (6:48 p.m.—8:24 p.m.)
-L: Kṛṣṇa milks the cows
/Q: “Kṛṣṇa beamed a soft sweet smile while offering respects to His father before entering the courtyard. The beauty of Śyāma’s lovely face paled the radiance of a million full moons. Various assistants

/Q: recited Kṛṣṇa’s glorious qualities as He put on His jeweled sandals. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.73-74 “Kṛṣṇa walked toward the gośālā and His servants followed Him carrying pitchers of water, betel nut caskets, fans, sticks and ropes for tying the cows. Govinda-līlāmṛta 20.23 “Kṛṣṇa rested His left arm on the shoulder of a friend while accepting an attractive tāmbūla from another friend with His right hand. Kṛṣṇa continued chewing the tasty tāmbūla while joyfully entering the gośālā.” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.75 Tulasī finished her narration and then untied the border of her cloth to present Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda to Rādhā. Tulasī pacified Rādhā’s ears with the nectar of hari-līlā and pleased Rādhā’s tongue with the nectar of Śyāma’s sweet remnants. The combination acted as two cooling rivers to relieve and satisfy the sakhīs. When Rādhā heard that Kṛṣṇa had gone to milk the cows, She left her in-laws’ house on the pretext of bathing in Pāvana Sarovara. Rādhikā and Her sakhīs climbed a wonderful watchtower on the banks of Pāvana Sarovara to secretly drink the nectar from the moon of Murāri’s face with their thirsty cakora eyes. Rādhikā, surcharged with bliss from Her vision of Śyāma, said, “Are the golden strings that tie the pearls to Kṛṣṇa’s turban, which covers His curly locks, slightly moving? Or is it lightning bound at its roots by constellations while the rising sun’s rays swallow the dense darkness above the moon? O sakhī! The earrings swinging on Śyāma’s cheeks, which destroy the darkness of the gopīs’ chastity, are not earrings. They are two rays of light trying to please us by dancing, however, they cannot stand in front of Kṛṣṇa’s moonlike face. “Cupid sits on his vehicle of Kṛṣṇa’s makara earrings and aims the sharp arrows of Kṛṣṇa’s glances to pierce our minds. However, he loses his concentration on the target due to fear of the buzzing bees trying to drink the honey from Kṛṣṇa’s flower crown. Therefore, Cupid tied his makaras to Kṛṣṇa’s ears. “O sakhī! See another curious thing! Kṛṣṇa’s gentle clear eyes have two lusty wives named Tāra (pupils). They have produced sons in the form of Kṛṣṇa’s restless glances that attract women fixed in chastity from the privacy of their homes and pollute them. “O sakhī! Look closely! The glances of that swain are like rivers of Cupidity that flow in all directions. The sañcāri bhāvas (transitory ecstasies) of joy, zeal, patience and bewilderment are like thieves that climb in the sapphire boats floating on those rivers and loot the wealthy merchants of the gopīs’ restless eyes. “O sakhī! A sweet smile does not emanate from Kṛṣṇa’s enchanting bimba fruit-like lips. Nor does honey flow from the two bandhuka flowers of His lips for the honeybees of the world. Rather camphor water from Cupid’s coral water gun is entering our eyes.” Rādhā submerged in the waves of coyness in the milk ocean of joy on describing the moonlike face of Her lover. Viśākhā rescued Her by saying, “O sakhī Rādhikā! Look at Hari milking the cows! Feast Your eyes on the wonderful sight. You will then consider even the sour words of Jaṭilā to be as sweet as nectar.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 17.28-35 The regal goddess of evening, wearing the ornament of the setting sun and her eyes of night blooming lotus flowers, quickly approached Kṛṣṇa to serve Him with the utmost attachment. Birds returned from all directions to settle safely in their nests. Ghee lamps lit up every house as the directions

/Q: turned gray in the absence of sunshine. It was time for the cow’s evening milking in the village of Gokula, which resounded with the crying of calves and which was beyond all material illusion. As Kṛṣṇa neared the gośālā, the lamplights flickered and the cows let loose a chorus of mooing. The combination of flickering lights and mooing, which sounded like uludvani, appeared like an ārātrika to welcome Kṛṣṇa. The moon rising in the eastern direction seemed like an woman anxiously desiring to see Hari. The moon, expressing the intensity of its desire with its red color, spread its rays outward like eager hands. As the reddish moon arose, it tinted the face of the eastern direction with the flush of desire, and spread its rays in all directions to remove the covering garment of darkness. The herd of cows shone like the moon and the moon glittered like a crystal mountain range. If not for their black hooves and horns, one could mistake the herd of cows for the moonlight and the moonshine for the herd of cows. The huge bulls, which looked like sages or boulders from Mount Kailāsa, slept happily without inconvenience wherever they found themselves at nightfall. Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of bliss, wore jeweled sandals while standing in the yard before the gośālās. Kṛṣṇa felt great satisfaction upon viewing the magnificent cow sheds built with large crystal pillars. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.76-84 Viśākhā said, “O Rādhā, look! All the cows are anxiously waiting for Kṛṣṇa to speak. When Kṛṣṇa calls their names, ‘Dhavalī, Śavalī,’ the cows become excited. Mooing in response, they push the other cows aside and run to Kṛṣṇa. Govinda, with tears shining in His eyes, satisfies the cows by stroking their backs. “The prince of Vraja squats on the ground to milk the cows and holds a golden milk bucket between His knees. Sakhi! Just observe how the milk in the bucket reflects Śyāma’s gorgeous face, which appears like the moon rising from the ocean of milk. Kṛṣṇa’s turban loosens slightly from touching the cow’s belly. His curly locks slip out from under it like a swarm of bumblebees and His lotus eyes stop dancing. “Kṛṣṇa worships mother earth a few squirts of milk. He wets His fingers and the cow’s udder with a few more drops. Govinda moves His hands up and down to milk the cows. The milk splashing into the bucket makes the sound “śana, śana, śana.” The unmilked cows raise their ears out of eagerness to be milked. Kṛṣṇa’s hips and thighs are marked with pure white drops of milk. The cows and calves, with tears-filled eyes, bend their necks to drink the nectar of Śyāma’s beautiful youthful form. O sakhī, just see how Your lover milks the cows! “The cowherd men, after happily milking the multicolored cows, utter splendid commands like, ‘Take it away! Come! Bring it here! Do it quickly! Give it to me! Go!’ Even the most learned person could never count the magnificent cows that are as blackish as Giridhārī Himself.” Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 17.36-40 When Kṛṣṇa finished milking the cows, He let the calves suck their mother’s milk to their full satisfaction. Amazingly, the cows’ milk bags remained full even after milking! This phenomenon greatly pleased the cowherd men. As the cows gazed upon Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face with unblinking eyes and hearts full of love, streams of milk automatically poured from their udders. The clever cowherds collected the milk in pails and delivered it to Nanda Mahārāja. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma escorted the cows and calves to their respective stalls. Afterwards, They met Nanda Mahārāja, who was busy sending the porters back to the palace with the milk and posting

/Q: guards at the gates of the gośālās. Nanda Mahārāja joined his sons and their friends to walk back to the palace. Govinda-līlāmṛta 20.32-35 Kṛṣṇa received a signal from His confidential boyfriends about Rādhikā’s whereabouts. Śyāma, obsessed with desire for love play, went to the watchtower beside Pāvana Sarovara to meet Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa usually returned home after milking the cows. On hot summer evenings however, Mādhava enjoyed bathing in Pāvana Sarovara. Fortunate persons always immerse themselves in the nectar ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 17.41

+A: (8:24 p.m.—10:48 p.m.) Pradośa-līlā - Evening pastimes
/Q: As Gauracandra pondered Kṛṣṇa’s ecstatic pastimes in Vraja, He swooned with longing, His eyes flooded with tears and His bodily hair stood erect in bliss. Gaura, identifying Himself with Rādhā’s intense mood of separation, cried out in a choked voice, “I must go to the bower to see Kṛṣṇa. I cannot wait any longer!” Gaurhari stumbled along the path to Śrīvāsa Thakura’s house. He sat down amongst His devotees, like the full moon surrounded by the stars. May I always remember the blissful evening pastimes of Gaurahari. Mūla-sūtra: (by the author) Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma ate, rested briefly and went to the palace auditorium. They respected everyone properly before sitting down to enjoy the performances. A variety of bards and Purāṇic reciters entertained everyone. Kṛṣṇa happily rewarded the performers with money, grains and cloth before retiring to His quarters. Yaśodā’s assistants served milk to the divine boys and then laid Them down to rest. Yaśodā repaired to her bedchamber. Kṛṣṇa intensely yearned to meet His sweetheart. He secretly left the palace and ran to the forest bower. Meanwhile, in Yavāṭa, Rādhā rose from bed, sat in a chair and washed Her face. The sakhīs dressed Rādhā according to the phases of the moon; a dark blue dress during waning moon or a white one during the waxing phase. Rādhikā learned of the meeting place set by Her messengers, and then left home accompanied by Her intimate sakhīs. Rādhā ran and sometimes walked slowly while proceeding to the gem-studded cottage in a bower of desire trees beside the Yamunā. Kiśorī and Her sakhīs admired the astonishing beauty of the pastime cottage. Mūla-sūtra: With the arrival of night, the sakhīs eagerly prepared Rādhā for Her abhisāra (meeting) with Kṛṣṇa by dressing Her in white clothes during the waxing moon or dark ones during the waning moon. Following Vṛndā’s cue, they went to the saṅketa-kuñja (scheduled meeting place) among the desire trees on the banks of the Yamunā. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma joined Nanda and the Vrajavāsīs to watch the entertainment in the palace theater. Afterwards, Yaśodā tucked Kṛṣṇa in bed. Due to His thirst for pastimes of love, Kṛṣṇa left unseen by anyone and ran down the path to meet Rādhikā in a solitary grove. When Their eyes met, Rādhā-Mādhava’s minds danced in joy and Their divine bodies erupted with expressions of love. Rādhā-Śyāma joked with Their sakhīs and then relished the most intimate and satisfying pastimes. May we always remember Rādhā-Govinda’s enchanting evening pastimes.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.1
= P: Pradośa-līlā (8:24 p.m.—8:48 p.m.)
-L: Induprabhā Sakhī brings Rādhā news of Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Rādhā passed Her time in Jaṭilā’s house by lying Her lover down on the bed of Her mind in the golden home of Her body, behind the closed doors of Her beautiful eyes. Induprabhā-sakhī suddenly arrived from Nanda Mahārāja’s palace with the intention of allaying Rādhā’s anguish. Induprabhā said, “O Rādhā! Vṛndāvanacandra, whose absence makes You so distressed, craves madly for You and no one else. Although Kṛṣṇa steals the hearts of everyone in the three worlds, His

/Q: heart has been stolen by You!” “Viśākhā said, ‘O sakhī Induprabhā! Your kṛṣṇa-kathā is like a shower of ambrosia for the cakora birds of our ears.” Induprabhā continued, “Nanda Mahārāja sat Giridhārī on His left side and Baladeva on his right to take Their meal. It seemed that Kuvera, the lord of wealth, was flanked by his two gems padma and śaṅkha. Nanda Mahārāja’s brothers and their sons, who were invited nightly for dinner, sat around him like cakora birds thirsting for the nectar of Hari’s moonlike face. Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma looked like the Himalayas of transcendental bliss surrounded by other mountains. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 18.6-10 “On Yaśodā’s request, Tuṅgī, the mother of Subhadra and the wife of Upananda (Nanda’s brother), who was expert in etiquette, and Rohinī first served the brāhmaṇas, their own husbands, Subhadra, Balarāma, Kṛṣṇa and others. Tuṅgī served warm, sweet smelling rice saturated with golden ghee. There were gold trays of assorted fried items and wet and dry sabjis placed before the guests. “Tuṅgī, Rohinī and Yaśodā carefully served Nanda and his clan the various bitter, pungent, spicy, salty, sour and sweet items in their respective order. They also served soft rotīs, sweet rice, pies, cakes and sañjava made from milk and white flour. Yaśodā, who knew everyone’s appetite and preference, signaled to Rohinī to serve their favorite dishes. Yaśodā personally distributed unlimited amounts of condensed milk, śikhariṇī, fruit pickles, mathita, rasālā, ṣādāva, thick yogurt and sweet mango juice. “Yaśodā, Rohinī and Tuṅgī felt shy before Nanda and the guests. They could not directly exhibit their motherly concern to sumptuously feed their sons. Indirectly however, they expressed their eagerness with their minds, words and glances. The minds of Nanda Mahārāja and the men melted with attachment and their bodies moistened with tears of love. They directly expressed their affection for Kṛṣṇa and His friends by inducing them to eat with their minds, glances and words. “The elder men urged the already stuffed Kṛṣṇa and the boys to eat again and again. Their mothers exulted in seeing them eat. The only difference between the morning and evening meal was that Madhumaṅgala’s joking was more subdued before the elders, and Yaśodā’s eagerness to serve was more intense because of the presence of many relatives. Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma could not joke and play freely. Moreover, Yaśodā could not liberally pamper the boys because of the presence of Nanda and his brothers. However, for Kṛṣṇa’s relatives the evening meal was a hundred times more blissful because the entire family could enjoy Kṛṣṇa’s association. “During the evening meal, the fathers savored the topmost bliss in all their senses by seeing Kṛṣṇa’s sweet smile, hearing His nectar words, smelling His sweet fragrance mixed with the incense swirling about the dining table, touching the wind as the boys fanned Kṛṣṇa with palm leaves and by tasting the delicious food. Govinda-līlāmṛta 20.45-53 “After the meal, the servants brought cool, fragrant water in jewel studded golden pots so that Nanda, Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and their friends could rinse their mouths.”
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 5.71
-L: Kṛṣṇa’s sleeping chamber
/Q: Induprabha Sakhī continued, “Kṛṣṇa’s living quarters were located right next to Nanda Maharaja’s. Kṛṣṇa’s rooms were pleasurable, attractive and opulent, being made of gold and jewels. Kṛṣṇa’s bedroom and other rooms were in the center. Small gardens filled with trees, fresh creepers and

/Q: flowering bowers spread out on all sides. Lakes with jeweled banks sheltering sporting swans and warbling cuckoos, which were its crown and earrings, refreshed the entire atmosphere. “The gopīs, sporting shimmering white silk sārīs, flower petal crowns, pearl armlets and ivory earrings, were anointed with fragrant kuṅkuma and sandalwood paste. They enhanced the moonlight with the glitter of their teeth when they smiled. The gorgeous Vraja-gopīs, anxious to relish pastimes with Kṛṣṇa, waited in the garden to meet their Lord under the brilliant moonlight of the pleasurable night. “Some young obedient sevādāsīs had already washed, dried and scented Kṛṣṇa’s bedroom with black aguru incense. Kṛṣṇa’s bedroom, with its decorations of perfumed garlands and jeweled pots topped with colorful flags, was most pleasant to see. Pleasurable objects carved from spotless ivory adorned the room. Kṛṣṇa’s golden bed was inlaid with jewels. It had posts made of moonstone. “Attractive pillows and soft sheets as white as milk foam lay on top. The bed appeared like a thousand drifting clouds when the moonlight shone through the latticed window. Beautiful green parrots perched in the corner of the room. Kṛṣṇa, desirous of sleeping, entered the excellent, naturally attractive apartment accompanied by many youthful male and female servants.”
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 8.1-9
-L: Kṛṣṇa describes Rādhā’s beauty
/Q: Induprabhā Sakhī joyfully continued, “O Rādhā! Kṛṣṇa smiled as He reclined on a flowerbed on the veranda surrounded by His friends. Listen to how Śyāma, dispirited in Your absence, praised Your sweet beauty. “Kṛṣṇa clutched Subala’s hand and asked, ‘O Subala! Tell Me, even though I am naturally powerful, what was that beauty that pervaded the whole meadow? I became bewildered and lost My patience when I went there today to tend the cows with you and the cowherd boys. My dearest friend! Was that profuse beauty some nectar churned from the ocean of sweetness, or was it a wave of lightning shining through Her clothing, or was it an appearance of the queen of the land of perfume, or was it a cluster of Cupid’s campaka flower arrows? ‘O Subala! How astonishing! Was it a blooming lotus anointed with saffron on top of a lustrous aura, or a spotless full moon rising from the ocean of erotic mellows (madhura rasa)? Above that moon or lotus were two restlessly dancing jeweled khañjana birds, which beat my eyes with their tails (glances). ‘Aha! What was that wondrous thing? I became stunned with curiosity. Suddenly that object was covered by a mass of dark clouds (a blue veil) and disappeared behind the creepers. Then I could no longer relish it. O sakhā! Even the slightest remembrance of it arouses lusty feelings in Me. Therefore, the peon of My heart went searching for that object so that My eyes might see it again. Until now, the peon has not returned. Did he become bound up in the forest by the henchmen of Cupid?’
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 18.15-20
-L: Subala describes Rādhā’s separation
/Q: “Subala sympathetically listened to Kṛṣṇa’s mournful words, and then replied, ‘O killer of Agha! As soon as Rādhikā, for whom You were searching and who is praised by the three worlds, saw You, She lost Her patience. She felt great pain in Her heart, and then rolled on the ground in ecstasy. Tears

/Q: streamed over Rādhā’s body as She cried. Dear friend! The sakhīs, feeling empathetic for Rādhā’s disturbed condition, said, “O slender-waisted Rādhā! Mukunda has come to make You happy.” ‘Rādhā, regaining consciousness, excitedly asked, “Where is that ocean of rasa? Where is He?” ‘The sakhīs made Rādhā stare into the dark night and said, “Just see, He is there.” ‘Rādhā mistook the darkness for You, became pacified and covered Her body with cloth out of bashfulness.’ Induprabhā continued, “O Rādhā! Kṛṣṇa cried large teardrops of love after hearing Subala’s narration of Your suffering in separation. It seemed that the two cakora birds of Kṛṣṇa’s eyes were vomiting one pearl after another, after having eaten them by mistake due to thinking they were drops of nectar from the moon. “I was near Kṛṣṇa performing service. He anxiously looked at me and said with great longing, ‘Sakhi! Go quickly and ask Rādhikā to meet Me beneath the desire tree on the bank of the Yamunā.’ Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 18.21-24 “When Yaśodā told Dhaniṣṭhā to feed Tulasī and Kasturī-mañjarī, Dhaniṣṭhā said, ‘What to speak of eating, Tulasī will not even touch water until Rādhā has eaten.’ “Yaśodā, appreciating Tulasī’s attachment to You, lovingly said, ‘Tulasī, quickly take the rice and sabjis to Rādhā and Her sakhīs!’ “Dhaniṣṭhā cheerfully packed the rice and sabjis along with Kṛṣṇa’s remnants given by Rohiṇī in a big basket and gave it to Tulasī. After Tulasī left, Dhaniṣṭhā privately informed Subala of Your evening rendezvous spot. She then gave him the pān You made earlier for Kṛṣṇa.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 20.57-6
-L: Nanda entertains Kṛṣṇa
/Q: “Yaśodā attentively fed all the servants and maidservants with her own hands. Yaśodā then sat down to eat with her sisters-in-law and their daughters. Govinda-līlāmṛta 20.60 “Nanda Mahārāja and his brothers dove in an ocean of bliss within the palace theater. All the virtuous Vrajavāsīs and talented artists assembled there just to get a glimpse of Kṛṣṇa. The audience included brāhmaṇas, members of exalted family lines and the cowherd men. A host of expert clowns, dancers, singers and storytellers gathered there to please Kṛṣṇa. “Nanda Mahārāja greeted the distinguished guests with hospitality befitting their status and qualification. He honored his seniors, shared affection with his equals and bestowed mercy on his subjects. The guests were pleased with Nanda’s reception, but their minds and eyes were extremely eager to see Kṛṣṇa. “Nanda thought, ‘My son has just eaten and is now resting since He is very tired. However, all the Vrajavāsīs have come to see Him, so what should I do?’ At that moment, Kṛṣṇa appeared in the assembly with His friends. “The hearts of the Vrajavāsī guests swelled like the ocean as the Kṛṣṇa moon rose over the assembly. The cakora birds of their eyes felt delight, their hair stood erect like medicinal herbs and their smiles bloomed like lilies. Kṛṣṇa respected the brāhmaṇas and elders with folded hands. He smiled at His friends. Kṛṣṇa looked compassionately upon His juniors and other dependants gathered there before He sat with His friends. “Jaya, jaya!” hailed the artists from the stage as they initiated the evening’s entertainment. Various

/Q: performers recited the Vedas, praised Kṛṣṇa’s ancestors by narrating their exploits, played loudly on different musical instruments and made whooping noises. In many ways, they loudly proclaimed the glories of Nanda’s dynasty of cowherds. At one point, the audience became a little boisterous. Nanda Mahārāja ordered his constables to restore the peace. They raised their sticks and gestured with their hands that the guests should relax and sit properly. “Nanda signaled to the actors to perform for the pleasure of the audience who were eager to see and hear them. Male and female artists enacted dances such as tāṇḍava (frantic male dance), chalikya (dance while balancing plates) and lāsya (female dance). Actors dramatized the pastimes of Rāma and Narasiṁha. There were magicians, jugglers and some acrobats balancing upon raised bamboo poles. Some showed tricks such as passing a string into one nostril and out the other. “Poets narrated Purāṇic lore, sang songs and described the biographies of Kṛṣṇa’s ancestors. Some skilled paṇḍits instantly composed poems glorifying Kṛṣṇa’s birth and activities. Musicians played pleasingly on flutes, gongs, vīṇās, karatals and percussion instruments. After the show, Nanda and other wealthy visitors rewarded the performers with gold, ornaments and expensive clothes. The artists, however, were fully satisfied simply with Kṛṣṇa’s darśana. They accepted the charity merely out of respect for the donors. “The audience started crying tears of love while drinking the moonbeams of Kṛṣṇa’s sweet smile with the cakoras of their eyes. They remained dissatisfied even after repeatedly drinking the nectar. Aha! How inconceivable are the ways of love!
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.2-16
= P: Pradośa-līlā (8:48 p.m.—10:00 p.m.)
-L: Kṛṣṇa goes to His bedroom
/Q: “Yaśodā’s servant named Raktak entered the assembly, offered respects to Nanda Mahārāja and whispered, ‘O king of Vraja, Vrajeśvarī is very eager to behold her darling son.’ “Kṛṣṇa, submitting to Nanda’s coaxing, reluctantly agreed to leave. Kṛṣṇa knew the guests would be pained by His separation. Therefore, He kindly solaced them with the nectar of His merciful glances and sweet smiles before going to His mother. Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma, Madhumaṅgala and Their friends joyfully sat down on a clean platform to drink the warm condensed milk mixed with sugar and a pinch of camphor served by Yaśodā. Due to her intense motherly affection, a stream of milk poured from Yaśodā breasts to moisten her clothes. Kṛṣṇa bid farewell to His friends. Yaśodā and Rohiṇī took Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and Madhumaṅgala to their bedrooms and laid them to rest on separate beds. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.17-20 “O Rādhā! Your incomparably clever lover left the palace, unseen by anyone. He now waits for You at the meeting place on the bank of the Yamunā. You should eat a little something, deceive Your superiors, and passionately run to meet Your Priyatama.” Saying this, Induprabhā left.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 18.26
-L: Rādhā’s evening meal
/Q: Tulasī arrived in Yāvaṭ and showed Kṛṣṇa’s remnants to Rādhikā and the sakhīs. Everyone bloomed with joy upon seeing and smelling the pleasing colors and fragrance of the food. Rūpa-mañjarī took the prasāda from Tulasī, brought it to the dining room, and prepared plates for Rādhā and Her

/Q: friends. Meanwhile, Jaṭilā called to Viśākhā, “Abhimanyu has eaten and gone to the gośālā to rest. Please call Rādhā to take Her meal [the remnants of Abhimanyu].” Viśākhā said gravely, “Your daughter in-law has fallen asleep from exerting Herself in the forest. I will save the food and give it to Her later.” Viśākhā smirked while keeping Abhimanyu’s remnants in a corner of the dining room. Viśākhā, smiling joyfully, met Rādhā and described how she had cleverly avoided Jaṭilā’s request. To honor Kṛṣṇa’s remnants, Rādhā and Her sakhīs sat on low, jeweled inlaid seats beside a gem- studded table covered with a splendid silken cloth. Rādhā relished Kṛṣṇa’s adharāmṛta (nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips mixed in the prasāda) just like a thirsty female swan sipping nectar. Lalitā and Viśākhā sat on Rādhā’s right and left. The other sakhīs sat around Rādhā in a semi-circle. Rūpa-mañjarī and Tulasī tenderly served Kṛṣṇa’s nectar-surpassing remnants to the sakhīs, just as Mohinī once distributed nectar to the demigods. There was actually very little food. However, when it was served the rice and sabjis seemed endless because they were touched by Hari’s transcendental hands, sweetened by Śyāma’s lips, glanced upon by Śrīmatī and hankered for by the whole world. As female swans savor the lotus stems left by their husbands, as deer enjoy the soft new shoots, as bees drink the flower nectar and as cakorīs imbibe the moonbeams, Rādhā and Her sakhīs attained the pinnacle of bliss relishing the remnants of their lover. Rādhikā and the sakhīs rinsed their mouths after eating. The sakhīs blissfully chewed Kṛṣṇa’s prasādī pān, and rested on beds while their maidservants rendered different services. Tulasī and Rūpa-mañjarī sent some of Rādhā’s remnants to Vṛndā via a messenger named Mālatī. Before sitting down to happily honor Rādhā’s remnants themselves, Tulasī and Rūpa arranged prasāda for Rādhā’s other sakhīs and mañjarīs. A mock fight broke out amongst the mañjarīs as they tried to place the best items on each other’s plates. Tulasī and Rūpa-mañjarī rinsed their mouths after eating. They went joyfully to serve Rādhārāṇī, who affectionately gave them Her prasādī pān.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 20.62-76
= P: Pradośa-līlā (10:00 p.m.—10:24 p.m.)
-L: Kṛṣṇa goes to meet Rādhā
/Q: Yaśodā put Kṛṣṇa to bed and retired to Her sleeping chamber. Kṛṣṇa closed His eyes for a few moments, got up abruptly and ushered the servants outside His room. Reentering His room, Kṛṣṇa locked the door from inside and slipped out a side door to meet Rādhikā. Crowds of people milled about in the moonlight by the main gate of the palace. Kṛṣṇa, fearing detection, went behind the palace and fled from the village on a secluded path covered by the shadows of the trees. As soon as Kṛṣṇa started walking, Vrajabhumī lifted Him on the lotus of her heart and whisked Kṛṣṇa to the rendezvous place with the speed of the wind. It seemed that Kṛṣṇa arrived there just by thinking of it. While proceeding, Kṛṣṇa anxiously thought, “I left the moonlit road to take the shaded path. I wonder if My Priyaji has arrived already.” Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.102-106 Lovely Rādhā rose from bed and relaxed on a gem-studded chair brought by Her mañjarīs.
/R: Govinda- līlāmṛta 2.59

-L: Rādhā describes Kṛṣṇa’s beauty
/Q: Rādhā, Her heart perturbed by passion, confided to a sakhī, “There is one young man named Nandanandana, whose complexion defeats the pride of blue sapphires. The enchanting song of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, which unties the knots of the undergarments of all chaste women, forever reigns supreme in Vṛndāvana. Lalita-mādhava 1.49 “O sakhī! Kṛṣṇa’s chest is like a broad dam in the river of determination of all women. The moonlight of His words forcefully closes the lotuses of a woman’s morality. Mādhava’s two arms are like stout pillars at a tantric sacrifice for destroying our longstanding shyness. What misfortune! His moving snake-like eyebrows devour our sense control and timidity. Vidagdha-mādhava 2.45 “The lustrous beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s form devastates the pride of a mirror crafted from the best of blue sapphires. Millions of Cupids perish at the sight of Kṛṣṇa’s splendid form, which is brighter than a million suns and sweeter than a million moons. Kṛṣṇa’s wavy glossy black hair is soft, scented, and most pleasing to see. Beauty personified serves Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face, which surpasses the splendor of the moon. Continuous waves of effulgent elegance flow across Mādhava’s face at every moment. “Śyāma’s forehead, whose upper portion is covered with curly locks, is the acme of brilliance. Kṛṣṇa’s forehead, anointed with attractive colorful tilaka, is the abode of all auspiciousness, sweetness and beauty. Dāmodara’s dancing eyebrows, unique components of His refinement, express His desires and conquer the influence of Cupid’s bow. They resemble a row of bees clinging to Hari’s lotus face. The edges of the elongated blooming eyes of the destroyer of agha (sin) contract without cause. Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, reddish like a lotus and covered with thick eyelashes, forever roll in intoxication. “Kṛṣṇa’s nose, which is more attractive than a sesame flower, bends down gracefully like the beak of a parrot. His nostrils flare like the arrow quiver of Cupid. The makara kundala (earrings) dangling from Śyāma’s ears embellish His cheeks and look like two extra petals on the lotus of His face. The beauty of Śyāma’s cheeks, reflecting the movements of His jeweled earrings and kissed by the dear gopīs winning a wager, is enhanced by His soft smile. “Kṛṣṇa’s radiant pursed lips outdo the red bandhuli flower in color and withhold a reservoir of sweet nectar. Kṛṣṇa’s red lips, marked with fine lines from His amorous pastimes, display tremendous pride. Kṛṣṇa’s auspicious chin, with its lower and middle parts being deep, looks like a pair of ripe jambu fruits and it flows with streams of nectar. Śyāma’s smile reveals His magnificent teeth, which are more lustrous than a host of pearls. Kṛṣṇa’s teeth are marked with red lines surpassing a pile of sikhara jewels. They are colored like ripe pomegranate seeds, and are the essence of spiritual pastimes. “Kṛṣṇa’s glorious pink tongue, which adds inconceivable glory to the sweet beauty of His face, emerges like a new petal from the center of a lotus. Govinda’s attractive neck puts blue sapphires to shame, and it is marked with three handsome deep lines. Mādhava’s broad chest, the abode of Lakṣmī, is raised like a jeweled door and radiant with the Śrīvatsa (white hair curling to the right) and the Kaustubha gem. Kṛṣṇa’s most auspicious back, which dips slightly in the middle and spreads out to His broad shoulders, is thickly built at the root of the arms and fully developed on the sides. “Kṛṣṇa’s powerful long arms challenge the legs of elephants. Kṛṣṇa’s arms, which the gopīs repeatedly kiss, are like jeweled sacrificial pillars for binding His lovers during amorous sports.

/Q: Kṛṣṇa has well formed hands with radiant fingernails and rings of gold, diamond, sapphire, ruby and pearl on each finger. His fingers resemble five snakes with jewels on their heads. What man would not lose his intelligence upon gazing at Śyāma’s handsome abdomen, which is shaped like an aśvattha leaf, being broad at the top and narrow at the waist? Kṛṣṇa’s waist has three distinct lines created by the raised and indented portions of His torso and a deep navel like a lake. “Who would not become intoxicated viewing the creeper of attractive hair rising from the well of Kṛṣṇa’s navel and resting boldly over the skin of His abdomen? Śiva’s ḍamaru drum crumbles to pieces at the sight of Kṛṣṇa’s slender waist, which is narrow enough to grasp in one fist. Śyāma has raised rounded buttocks. His hips are bound by a belt of golden bells, which emanates a garland of sparkling light rays and conquers the best of vīṇās with its tinkling sound. “Who would not become greedy on beholding the breadth, power and dark hue of Śyāma’s thighs, which surpass Brahma’s creation of the banana trunk? Kṛṣṇa’s knees, which are neither bony nor too prominent, are graceful, muscular, rounded and more gorgeous than the brilliant treasure chest of Cupid. Who could walk away from Kṛṣṇa after seeing His slender shanks, which taper gracefully below His knees like the flow of the sweetest honey? Kṛṣṇa’s calf muscles, which are more beautiful than kadamba blossoms, are a bubbling ocean of rasa or two play balls of Cupid. “Kṛṣṇa’s attractive feet spread out like streams from a river of sweetness and bestow the supreme happiness. They reflect the luster of lotuses and are tinted the color of rubies. The sparkling glow of Hari’s toenails illuminates His lotus feet, which are marked with the distinctive symbols of a flag, lotus, barleycorn and elephant goad. Vrajendranandana bestows the topmost limits of whatever His devotees’ desire. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 4.3-32 “The pretty ladies who do not decorate their hearts with the ornament among all men bring misfortune upon their family, character, youth and good qualities. O sakhī! I have wagered My life. What fear should I have of My elders? If I attain Kṛṣṇa or not, whom should I fear? If My husband kills Me, so what? If My friends reject Me, so what? If the cultured folk mock Me, so what? I will not blink an eye because I have accepted Mādhava as My all and all! “O sakhī! Just by hearing Kṛṣṇa’s name, I feel bashful, lose control of My senses, abandon all fear of My elders and fall unconscious. I cannot imagine what will happen if I actually see Him? Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 8.5-8 “O sakhī! Keśava’s playful dealings have burned My heart like halāhala poison. His profuse qualities are gnawing at My vitals like a voracious insect. Śyāma’s love agitates My heart with a searing sensation. Alaṅkāra-kaustubhaḥ 3.21 “Let My husband become angry and let My friends criticize Me. Let there fall upon Me whatever other catastrophe may be in the world. I do not care! I simply wish that My eyes may eternally drink the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s handsome form. Padyāvalī 176 “O sundari (beautiful friend)! By continually playing His flute on the bank of the Yamunā that playful debauchee has stolen My heart.”
/R: Padyāvalī 165
-L: Lalitā comforts Rādhā and their departure
/Q: Lalitā said, “O slender-waisted sakhī Rādhā! Do not consider the sound of the flute to be ordinary. That sound is the Garuḍa, which devours the snakes of the gopīs’ composure. That sound is the

/Q: Dhanvantari who removes the serious ailment of the gopīs’ shyness. Kṛṣṇa’s flute sound is the Agastya Muni who drinks the ocean of a chaste woman’s pride. Vidagdha-mādhava 1.37 “O sakhī Rādhā, listen! Your relatives are all asleep and Abhimanyu is far away in the gośālā. Just put Your memory, discrimination, sense control and timidity to sleep and go meet Your lover in the bower. You will not experience any fatigue in walking along the path shown by Kṛṣṇa’s sweet love. The soldiers of Cupid are guarding that path which is traversed by the longing of the heart.” Viśākhā said, “O gorgeous lady! As the bright rays of the rising moon illumined the forest, Kṛṣṇa climbed to a high vantage point searching for You. Why are You not donning white silk cloth and smearing Your body with sandalwood paste and camphor before treading the path to Your beloved?” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 15.73-74 During the waxing moon, Rādhā dressed in swan white silken cloth that blended with the moonbeams. On dark moonless nights, Rādhā and Her friends wore dark blue garments, musk ointment, kṛṣṇa āguru tilaka, blue lotus ear decorations and blue sapphire ornaments. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.23-25 The gopīs, as on other full moon nights, decorated themselves with ivory earrings and a variety of pearl belts, armlets and necklaces. They scented their hair with mālatī garlands and tinted their complexions with sandalwood cosmetics. The gopīs, adorned in spotless cloth, glittered like moonlight. The glimmer of their excited eyes and eyebrows was reduced slightly by their veils, which extended without restriction to their delicate swan-like feet. One could not distinguish between the effulgence of the gopīs and that of the camphor dust sprinkled on the footpath. The gopīs tried to run quickly out of eagerness to meet Kṛṣṇa. They soon tired and moved slowly however, due to their heavy hips. The Vraja-gopīs, mistaking the rays of the moon to be a garden of silver creepers, reached out to take support of the creepers in order to relieve their fatigue. The gopīs’ legs sometimes became paralyzed due to separation from Śyāma. At other times, the gopīs trembled in delight while contemplating their upcoming love games with their dearest. Their bodies broke out in goose bumps whenever they remembered Kṛṣṇa’s touch. The gopīs showered the night with sweet smiles as they moved through the moonlight to rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa. The Vraja-gopīs, their bodies glowing under the moon rays, seemed to be wearing moonlight for clothes as they scurried along toward Śyāma. At one point, they lost their way due to mistaking their own lusters with that of the moon. Their confidential manjaris showed the correct path. Rādhikā, slowed by the heaviness of Her beautiful wide hips, took support of Her dearest sakhi’s hand to move steadily toward the home of Her beloved. Perspiration soaked Her body and lamentation melted Her mind as Rādhā considered the great distance to Her destination. Kṛṣṇāhnika- kaumudī 6.15-19 Rādhā’s heart trembled with love for Śyāma as She grieved over the long distance between Her and Her beloved. Rādhā took one or two steps and considered that the toy lotus in Her hand was a burden so She dropped it on the ground. Rādhā walked another three or four steps and tossed off the jasmine garland bound in Her braid. After five or six steps, Rādhā discarded the pearl necklace from Her neck. Rādhā realized that it was hopeless in spite of giving up all that weight. Rādhikā rebuked Her heavy hips. However, since She could not abandon them, She just kept walking. Padyāvalī 2 1 Rādhā, out of fear of being caught, hid in the shadows beneath the huge trees as She hurried along the forest path. Rādhā and Her sakhīs, fixing their eyes on the bank of the Yamunā, arrived quickly at the

/Q: meeting place under the large branches of a banyan tree (Vaṁśivaṭa). It appeared that Vrajabhūmi personified had placed Rādhā on the lotus of her heart and carried Her swiftly across the large distance (forty miles) to Vaṁśivaṭa, as if Rādhā was walking on an escalator. Rādhā beheld the trysting place (Yogapīṭha) on the spotless shore of the Yamunā called Govinda- sthala. It was on the top of a small hillock that ascended gradually from the banks of the Yamunā like a turtle’s back. The evening Yogapīṭha looked like a thousand-petaled lotus flower wherein each petal was a kuñja. The jeweled cottages were its whorl and the golden banana trees were its stamens.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.26-28
-L: Description of Govinda-sthala
/Q: Govinda-sthala was packed with desire trees that could fulfill every wish, pārijāta trees that destroyed all enemies, mandāra trees that destroyed poverty and santāna trees that bestowed all bliss. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.29 There were cooling yellow sandalwood (haricandana) trees to please Hari’s mind and body and many varieties of bountiful creepers. All the trees and creepers in Govinda-sthala could fulfill every conceivable desire of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs that other trees and vines could not. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.33-34 Restless śāla fish moved in the water and motionless śāla trees stood on the land. The rohita fish swam in the water and the rohita trees stood on the land. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.46 The great sages Hārīta, Bharadvāja and Śuka took shelter of the forest and recited Kṛṣṇa’s glories. Similarly, the pigeons (hārītas), skylarks (bharadvājas) and parrots (śukas) enlivened the atmosphere with their sweet singing. Saints like Gālava, Vatsa and Śāṇḍilya would often visit the hermitages in the forest. Similarly, Govinda-sthala was ornamented with gālava, vatsa and śāndilya trees. At the bases of the trees there were water troughs and square, hexagonal or octagonal shaped jeweled platforms. The different platforms had steps reaching up the knee, thigh, hip, navel, chest or neck. Some platforms were made of rubies and blue sapphires with moonstone water troughs, and other platforms were made of moonstone with water troughs of rubies and blue sapphires. The whole Yogapīṭha was beautified by blooming golden trees with sapphire platforms, sapphire trees with golden platforms, cat’s eye trees with crystal platforms, lapis lazuli trees with diamond platforms, diamond trees with ruby platforms and moonstone trees with emerald platforms. Every tree had a different platform and the brances of every tree were embraced by blossoming creepers. In Govinda-sthala, gold trees grew from sapphire earth, coral trees from golden earth, crystal trees with coral earth, sapphire trees with ruby earth and trees made of rubies were growing from emerald earth. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.55-59 The creepers of the forest were endowed with flowers already formed into garlands and they had ready to eat, large ripe fruits. The jeweled cottages inside the bowers had jeweled pictures on their walls. Colorful canopies hung over the pastime beds, which were smothered in fragrant flower petals and adorned with soft pillows. Crystal glasses and jugs filled to the brim with honey wine, boxes of pān, scents, vermilion, jeweled mirrors, cāmaras, flower fans and decanters of kajjala and kuṅkuma waited beside each bed.

/Q: The kuñjas had thick flowering creepers for walls and roofs made from the dense foliage of the trees. They looked just like jeweled temples. Govinda-sthala was filled with the pleasant singing and flitting about of many attractive birds, such as pigeons, doves, turtle doves, cuckoos, parrots, partridges, roosters, cranes, mynas, quail, shrikes, skylarks, peacocks, blue jays, cakoras and cātakas. In the center of Govinda-sthala was a golden place studded with jewels and surrounded by many groves of desire trees. At the foot of a desire tree in the middle of the golden circle was a great jeweled temple, the Yogapīṭha Mandir, surrounded by a raised platform with jeweled steps leading up on all sides. Four desire trees (pārijāta, mandara, haricandana, santana) graced the four corners. The golden siṁhāsana inside the Yogapīṭha Mandir was shaped like a lion resting on its rear legs. Its paws were raised above the ground. The lion, made of sunstone, had ruby eyes and its ears and tail were turned upwards. The lion throne appeared to be flying due its bright effulgence. A golden umbrella shaded the siṁhāsana, which sat on an eight-petaled lotus formation having colorful jeweled filaments. The lotus petals were covered with fine fabrics and stuffed with cotton to make comfortable seats. Eight desire tree kuñjas stood in the directions surrounding the Yogapīṭha Mandir. A small, jeweled cottage covered by intertwining desire creepers sat in each kuñja. Beyond the eight kuñjas was a circle of sixteen kuñjas and beyond that was a circle of thirty-two kuñjas. Outside of these kuñjas were circles of other, very beautiful kuñjas, constantly doubling in number. At the perimeter of Govinda-sthala there were many jeweled pictures of mating demigods, birds and animals meant to kindle an erotic mood. Next there was a banana patch with varieties of ripened bananas. The leaves were cooling because camphor oozed from their trunks. Just beyond the banana patch were unique gardens with rows of fragrant flowers. Next there were fruit orchards with trees bending down from the weight of their abundant ripened fruits. Vṛndā’s storerooms lay just beyond the orchards and flower gardens. Vṛndā’s maidservants kept varieties of paraphernalia here for serving Rādhā-Mādhava’s midnight pastimes. Rows of dense trees entwined with creepers stood just after the cottages. Next there were groves of betel nut trees whose green, yellow and fully ripened fruits hung within arm’s reach. Coconut trees encircled the entire area of Govinda-sthala like a necklace. Four jewel inlaid paths, lined with bakula trees, extended in the four directions from the Yogapīṭha Mandir to bathing places on the Yamunā. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.62- 85 The Vedas described the jeweled pavilion under the desire trees as the Yogapīṭha of Gopāla. The Vraja-gopīs called it Keli Mandir, the temple of amorous pastimes. Rādhikā and Her sakhīs thrilled with blissful memories of Govinda whenever they saw it. Govinda-līlāmṛta 21.94 Śyāma sat comfortably on a grand seat on the jeweled-studded platform, bathed in the moonlight near the best of groves. He sent Vṛndā-devī to welcome Rādhā and Her sakhīs and bring them to Him. Vṛndā went quickly to the entrance where she beheld a most fast moving, effulgent creeper. Vṛndā greeted that golden creeper in the form of Rādhā and joyfully brought Her to Kṛṣṇa. The mixing of Rādhā-Mādhava’s auras enhanced Their beauty. Rādhā gazed upon Kṛṣṇa as if He had just emerged from Her heart to appear before Her. She felt relief from Her haunting affliction. Happily realizing that She had finally attained Śyāma, Rādhā thought, “Where am I? Where did I

/Q: come from? How and why did I arrive here? What path did I traverse?” Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 6.25- 27 Rādhā felt immense joy in Her mind from beholding Her beloved, His flower garden, the beautiful moonlit night and the attractive kunjas decorated with creepers. Rādhā praised Her sakhīs for dispelling Her fever of separation by bringing Her there and for making such wonderful arrangements. Upon meeting the gopīs, Vṛndā noticed that their tender bodies had become tired from the arduous abhisara (love journey). To relieve them, Vṛndā placed each gopī at the door of a mādhavī blossom pavilion. The creepers felt completely satisfied as they fanned the gopīs with their fresh shoots under Vṛndā’s order.
/R: Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 6.29-30
= P: Pradośa-līlā (10:24 p.m.—10:48 p.m.)
-L: Meeting Kṛṣṇa
/Q: Śyāma held His flute in His hand and gracefully approached the gopīs. He personally fanned them with the edge of His cloth to comfort them. The sweet gesture flushed the gopīs’ faces with bashfulness. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 6.31 Vṛndā said, “O slender-limbed Rādhā! As You gazed upon the prince of the cowherds, sitting in the pastime cottage under the kadamba tree, the waves of Your glances, like liquid beauty arising from the milk ocean, turned the black Yamunā into the white Gaṅgā.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.33 Lalitā said, “O Viśākhā! When Rādhā directly met Mādhava, Her unblinking eyes became fixed upon Him and Her legs refused to move. No sound came from Her throat and no breath came from Her nostrils. Her heart was washed by the nectar of divine bliss. It appeared that Rādhā had entered a meditative trance of samādhi just like a great sage.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 12.31 One gopī with unblinking eyes drank the honey of Śyāmasundara’s lotus face. Even after deeply relishing its sweetness, she did not feel satiated. Only when Kṛṣṇa looked directly into her eyes did she become satisfied. One gopī, with crooked glances, took Kṛṣṇa along the path of her eyes into the temple of her heart. Fearing Kṛṣṇa would depart, She closed her eyes and continuously embraced Him within as Her body hair stood erect. When one gopī, who resembled a golden creeper, saw Kṛṣṇa before her, she kept her arms at her sides out of shyness. Then she stretched her body, trembling in great love. It seemed that Cupid was proudly vibrating the string on his campaka bow out of eagerness for battle. One cakora-eyed gopī, in order to attract Śyāma and relieve her fatigue, interlocked her fingers and extended her arms above her head. Her two arms framed the brilliant moon of her face beautified with a gentle smile. One bold sakhī moved her hand around in a circle while snapping her fingers to rid herself of shyness. The effulgence of her smile provided a pathway for shyness to leave her body. One doe-eyed gopī held her braid in her flower-petal fingers and tucked it between her breasts. While she forcibly pressed her breasts together with her arms, her eyes closed and her bodily hair stood on end. Her gestures clearly indicated her desire to enjoy with Kṛṣṇa. One zealous, lotus-faced gopī started shaking her head in wonderment due the sweetness she was experiencing by sniffing a play lotus. When a bee landed on the flower, she brushed it away with her

/Q: hand. As she kissed the lotus flower, her cheeks moistened with perspiration and her hair stood on end. One cakora-eyed gopī, weary from pastimes, rested her trembling arm on the shoulder of a friend while casting a sidelong glance at her lover’s face. The sidelong glance revealed her bashfulness in attempting to conceal her real desire. Holding the gopī’s shoulder conveyed her longing to embrace Kṛṣṇa. One gopī undid her hair and again rebound it while her glistening golden bangles jingled. In bewilderment, she thought her anger had hidden in the darkness of her bound up hair, so she searched there to quell it. Her actions indicated a complaint after enjoying with the Lord, and a display of obstinacy from her proud nature. One Vraja-gopī put her little finger in her left ear and scratched it while shaking her left arm. The jingling of her bangles sounded like a victory cry in the battle of love. One slender-waisted gopī aimlessly twirled a delicate lotus with her right hand while her bangles tinkled aloud. The spinning lotus resembled a giant whirlpool in the river of fresh beauty. The sound of her bangles signified victory in the battle of Eros. One gopī, perspiring profusely from the bliss arising from intense craving and the ecstatic anger from discovering Kṛṣṇa’s deceit, fanned herself with her cloth in an alluring manner. It appeared that Cupid was proudly waving his victory flag in the wind. One clever gopī laughed loudly to catch Kṛṣṇa’s attention. It seemed like a shower of flowers from the desire creeper growing within her that had been cast down by the tempest of longing. One very young, doe-eyed gopī cried profusely in joy upon beholding Kṛṣṇa. It seemed that her mind had melted out of joy, exclaiming, “Eyes, you are so fortunate to contact Kṛṣṇa directly. The other senses such as ears are not deriving such bliss!” Her mind embraced her eyes and poured out of them as tears. One gopī, stunned by seeing Kṛṣṇa, stood like a golden statue. It seemed she was carrying the weight of the beauty of all the women in the three worlds and thus could not move. The body of one gopī broke out in goose bumps like a kadamba tree blossoming from top to bottom. It seemed that the arrows of Cupid that had entered her heart during separation from Kṛṣṇa had now been drawn out by a special mystic jewel known as Kṛṣṇa’s kiss. One doe-eyed gopī, perspiring in all her limbs, looked like a golden lotus sprinkled with dew. It seemed that the moonstone of her mind had melted upon viewing the full moon of Kṛṣṇa’s face, and was oozing out of her body. One gopī, her eyes darting hither and thither like a thirsty cakora bird and her body continually trembling from the sight of Kṛṣṇa, resembled a campaka creeper blowing in the wind. It appeared that the bull elephant of desire had entered her body to trample the ground of her heart in a mad rampage. One fawn-eyed gopī, thinking her braid was a crooked snake crawling over her shoulder, pushed it away and knitted her eyebrows in fear. Then she ran away while striking the “snake” with her upper cloth. Her movements hinted that Kṛṣṇa should place His arms on Her shoulders. One gopī, harassed by some buzzing bees, playfully waved her lotus hand to shoo them away. She gracefully covered her lips with the edge of her veil to express her desire to kiss Kṛṣṇa. Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 19.55-74 One doubtful gopī thought, “Kṛṣṇa came before but He will not come now.” Rūpa-mañjarī assured her that the moon was quickly rising at the eastern edge of the forest.

/Q: Rādhā, Her heart erupting with joy and fear, said, “O sakhīs! I am worried that when beautiful Kṛṣṇa comes He will bewitch Us with powerful mantras. What shall We do then?” Rādhā slowly and gracefully walked away, making attractive sounds with Her ankle bells. To protect Herself, Rādhā turned around and cast crooked glances at Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā then quickly slipped behind some kadamba trees and secretly entered a pavilion made of vañjula creepers. “Kṛṣṇa, overcome with emotion, did not notice Rādhā’s departure. Upon meeting the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa manifested various symptoms of transcendental ecstasy within His body, mind and eyes. Not finding Rādhikā amongst them, however, Kṛṣṇa’s eyes darted about as He anxiously inquired about Her whereabouts.” Govinda-līlāmrṭa 21. 1
-L: Kṛṣṇa searches for Rādhā
/Q: Kṛṣṇa said, “O sakhīs! Where is your companion Rādhā?” Sakhīs: “Rādhā is at home.” Kṛṣṇa: “Why have you come without Her?” Sakhīs: “We have come to pick flowers for worshiping the sun-god.” Kṛṣṇa: “Then why do I smell Rādhā’s sweet fragrance here?” Sakhīs: “Because we closely associated with Kiśorī, our limbs also exude the same fragrance.” Kṛṣṇa: “You are lying!” Sakhīs: “So what if it is a lie!” Kṛṣṇa: “You would never come to the forest without Rādhikā, just as moonlight never appears in the sky without the moon!” Sakhīs: “Rādhā is not the offspring of the moon, She is the offspring of the sun—Vṛṣabhānu’s daughter. Though Rādhā remains in one place, like the sun, She spreads Her rays to You and the moon.” Although Kṛṣṇa joked with the gopīs, it did not diminish His intense longing to meet His beloved Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa then took a hint from Vṛndā and entered a golden temple. Śyāma could not distinguish between Śrīmatī’s lustrous golden complexion and the shining splendor of the temple itself. All the objects in the temple turned emerald green when Rādhā’s golden aura mixed with Śyāma’s blue effulgence. Kṛṣṇa searched for Rādhā among the golden statues in the temple. Rādhā, shivering with fear and joy, stood motionless. At one point Śyāma looked directly at Rādhā, but He mistook Her for one of the statues. Rādhā’s eagerness to embrace Kṛṣṇa pushed Her forward, but Her contrary nature pulled Her back. The sāttvika bhāva of paralysis, however, overcame both longing and unwillingness, so that Rādhā could not move at all. Kṛṣṇa hankered to touch Rādhā, but He also became paralyzed in bliss and could not move. Eventually Kṛṣṇa’s intense longing conquered the inertia and He stepped forward to hold Rādhā’s hand. Rādhikā’s hair stood erect when Govinda touched Her. Rādhā’s body trembled, tears welled in Her eyes, Her complexion changed color and perspiration dripped from Her body. Rādhikā knitted Her eyebrows, frowned menacingly at Kṛṣṇa and pulled Her hand from His. A few false tears fell from the reddened corners of Rādhikā’s smiling, restless, derision-filled eyes and

/Q: curling eyelashes. Through the gentle smile playing on Her lips, Rādhā managed to utter some inarticulate words of rebuke from Her throat. Śyāma felt boundless bliss beholding the unique emotions of His sweetheart. Without further delay, Rādhā-Mādhava plundered the kingdoms of each other’s transcendental bodies. Their noses, tongues, ears, eyes and hands eagerly satisfied themselves by intimate contact. The thief of Hari’s hands, armed with Cupid’s goad weapon, slipped under Rādhā’s blouse to steal the two golden pots concealed there. Rādhā checked the thief with Her own hands, even though She wanted the thief to be successful in His mission. Rādhā-Mādhava submerged in an ocean of bliss. The sakhīs, eager to witness the sweet pastimes of Priyā-Priyatama, slowly entered the temple. Although Rādhā felt very happy, She displayed a contrary mood. She accompanied Her sakhīs outside and sat on a raised platform. Śyāma, floating on waves of rasa, approached Kiśorī on the dais. Rādhā, fearing that Śyāma might grab Her, hid behind the sakhīs. While searching for Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa joyfully fondled the bodies of the gopīs who looked at Him with crooked loving eyes. Desires to enjoy expanded within the minds of Rādhā-Mādhava. Rādhā, however, suddenly showed a strong mood of contrariness. Nevertheless, the joy of the Divine Couple increased; for a lover floats in an ocean of bliss whenever His ladylove displays an unfavorable mood. Govinda-līlāmrṭa 21. 12-127

+A: (10:48 p.m.—3:36 a.m.) Niśa-līlā - Midnight Pastimes
/Q: Gauraṅga started a kīrtana in Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura’s courtyard in the midst of His devotees, who chanted the Lord’s holy names while enthusiastically clapping their hands. In the ecstasy of kīrtana, tears welled in Gauraṅga’s eyes, His hair stood on end, perspiration flowed continually, His body trembled and His voice choked up. When the nāma-saṅkīrtana subsided, Gauraṅga ate fruits and other food with His devotees. The golden Lord fell asleep on a bejeweled bed in a flower garden bathed in the cooling rays of the moon. May Lord Gauraṅga forever be the object of my service. Mūla Sūtra: When Rādhā-Mādhava joyfully met in the forest bower, Vṛndā and her vana-devīs worshiped Them with many fine articles. The Divine Couple and Their confidential sakhīs enjoyed a variety of blissful pastimes in the six seasonal forests of Vṛndāvana. They walked through the forest singing and joking together. Arriving at the bank of the Yamunā, they formed a circle. Rādhā-Mādhava danced in the center enjoying the rāsa-līlā. Rādhā-Mādhava danced ecstatically for a couple of hours and then drank honey wine to relieve Their fatigue. Due to intoxication, Rādhā-Mādhava’s eyes rolled lazily and They felt drowsy. The romantic Couple lay down on a flower bed in a bower to savor various conjugal pleasures. Afterwards, Rādhā-Mādhava played in the Yamunā. Then They ate sweets and forest fruits. Before Rādhā- Mādhava fell asleep, the affectionate gopīs pleased Them with cāmara fanning and foot massages. The sakhīs went to sleep in their own kuñjas. May we always remember the blissful midnight pastimes of Rādhā-Mādhava.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.1
= P: Niśa-līlā (10:48 p.m.—11:12 p.m.)
-L: Vṛndā serves Rādhā-Mādhava
/Q: With a humble entreaty, Vṛndā and her vana-devīs led Rādhā-Mādhava and the sakhīs from the jeweled temple to a golden throne illuminated by moonlight and decorated with scented flowers. The attractive throne was covered with a soft velvet sheet and cooled by the Yamunā’s breezes. The sakhīs sat the Divine Couple on the throne, and served Them betel nuts, cool water and perfume brought from Vṛndā’s storerooms. They offered colorful flower crowns, ornaments and garlands to Rādhā-Govinda. The mañjarīs waved cāmaras for Their pleasure. The soothing moonlit night, the refreshing cool forest and the lustrous bank of the Yamunā inspired Govinda to celebrate the rāsa dance with His beloved gopīs.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.2-5
-L: Pastimes in the forest
/Q: One by one, Kṛṣṇa enjoyed the different facets of His rāsa festival with the gopīs. They played in the forest (vana vihara), wandered and danced in a circle (cakra bhramaṇa). They performed a ladies’ circular dance (hamśaka), a couple’s dance (yugma nṛtya), a male dance (tāṇḍava), a female dance (lāsya) and solo dances. They sang self-composed songs, danced with amorous gestures, joked and played in the water. The forest of Vṛndāvana glowed attractively under the moonlight and blossomed with the charm of spring due to Kṛṣṇa’s presence. Hearing the rustling leaves, the buzzing bees, the gentle cooing of the

/Q: cuckoos and seeing the maddened dancing of the peacocks powerfully inspired Kṛṣṇa to sport with the sakhīs. Kṛṣṇa conveyed His wishes through the notes of His flute. The gopīs consented by repeatedly singing Kṛṣṇa’s names. Kṛṣṇa said, “O My sweethearts! I want to sport with you in the attractive forest, which is filled with blossoming flowers and shining in the charming moonlight.” The gopīs replied, “O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa! O lover, let it be!” Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs stood up and wandered through the bowers under the trees and creepers while singing softly in sweet voices. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.6- 1 The impassioned calls of the cuckoos soothed everyone’s ears. The gentle southern breeze, carrying the fragrance of honey laden mādhavī flowers, enhanced the sweetness of the atmosphere. Swarms of intoxicated young bees moved about the mallikā creepers drinking the nectar of half-opened blossoms. Their loud buzzing resembled the trumpeting conchshell of the spring season. Loved-crazed swans and crying cranes joyfully circled around in the many lakes. Bees flitted amorously in the blooming clusters of lotus flowers. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 17.1-3 The birds sang joyfully, “Jaya! Jaya!” in all directions. The creepers smiled and the leaves of the trees stood erect. The deer, eager to talk to their mates, stood in groups marveling at the scenery. The joyous flowers wet the earth with their tear drops of nectar. Kṛṣṇa appeared like a fresh rain cloud moving over the earth. Śrī Hari, displaying a sweet smile on His glowing moonlike face, flooded the world with waves of bliss as He amused Himself with the lovely-faced gopīs, encircling Him like a garland of lightning. Dāmodara was bedecked with a perfumed garland extending to His feet and fanned by the wind from buzzing bees as He walked amongst the trees and creepers singing sweet songs and vibrating His flute. The young gopīs ambled along with Śyāma and ardently praised His character with their melodious voices full of love and longing. Using His fingernail, Mādhava scratched love notes on leaves and passed them to His darling sakhīs. Kṛṣṇa personally picked the choicest flowers, leaves and creepers. Then Kṛṣṇa exhibited His talent by fashioning bodices, armlets and other ornaments to decorate the sakhīs. Mādhava painted the sakhīs’ feet and hands with flower pollen. In no time at all, Kṛṣṇa created mālatī flower necklaces, kadamba forehead ornaments, land lotus earrings, kunda flower chokers and waist belts from bakula, kesara and naga kesara flowers. Śyāma tossed flower pollen in the gopīs’ hair and colored their cheeks with lodhra pollen. The gopīs in turn hung kesara flowers on Kṛṣṇa’s ears, ketakī flowers in His hair and mālatī flowers on His chest. One gopī put aśoka flowers on Kṛṣṇa’s turban. Another gopī offered Him yuthī flower bangles and bracelets and bound His belly with a belt of bakula flowers. Mādhava retired to a lonely place in the forest to relish confidential pastimes with the beautiful damsels of Vraja. As the gopīs lost themselves in the rapture of love, the sound of cuckoos and maddened bees echoed through the trees. The gorgeous gopīs, whose brilliant golden complexions conquered the pride of moonlight, merrily sprinkled Kṛṣṇa’s body with fine golden pollen from white lotus flowers. The gopīs, tinkling their bangles, then initiated a fresh battle of love. Kṛṣṇa retaliated by hurling flower bombs at the gopīs. Even though the gopīs bombarded Him from all directions with flower pollen, Kṛṣṇa easily defeated them. The parrots and other birds proclaimed

/Q: Kṛṣṇa’s victory by shrieking “Jaya! Jaya!” Kṛṣṇa, bursting with a hero’s pride, pounded Rādhikā and Her sakhīs with a volley of flower bombs. Rādhā rallied Her angry sidelong glances to crush Kṛṣṇa into submission. Rādhā’s pet parrots warbled incessantly, “We have won! We have won!” At every moment Kṛṣṇa engaged in newer and newer pleasure pastimes. Rādhā started picking the aromatic, nectar-filled punnāga flowers. Some startled bees darted from the flowers, causing Rādhā to quickly withdraw Her lotus hand and tremble in fear. Kṛṣṇa said, “Hey there! This is fit punishment for You, since You are pilfering the punnāga (white lotuses or the best of men).” Rādhikā shyly lowered Her head and smiled at Śyāma’s joke. Rādhikā stood on Her tiptoes and stretched Her vine-like arms to pick a colorful flower high in the tree. Rādhā’s lower garment started slipping off. Rādhā then looked about nervously. Kṛṣṇa seized the opportunity to sneak up behind Rādhā and lift Her up. Rādhā blushed in embarrassment. One gopī, feigning calamity, said, “Some pollen has fallen in my eyes!” Her bangles chimed as she pretended to rub her eyes with her lotus hands. Kṛṣṇa, with a laugh and a look of concern, quickly approached her and said, “Let Me see!” On the pretext of blowing out the pollen, Kṛṣṇa moved close to her face and tenderly kissed her eyes. Rādhā tried to pick some flowers beyond Her reach in the branches of a tree. The tree behaved like a close friend and affectionately bent down its branches so Rādhā could easily pluck the flowers.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 17.65-77
-L: Glory of the forest
/Q: The forest featured many flowering trees such as mandāra, haricandana, aguru, santāna, campaka, punnāga, bakula, baka, kuruvaka, aśoka, ketakī, yūhī, jasmine, mādhavī, pāṭala, javā, sephālikā, mallī, mucukunda, kunda, nava-mallikā and golden yūthikā. There were trees laden with the fruits of guava, pomegranate, coconut, jack fruit, banana, āmrātaka, orange, rucaka, madhuka, śamika, kakkola, kovidāra, āmalakī, clove, lavalī, kāma-raṇga, jambi, sallakī, karuṇālebu, tamarind and kubjaka. All the trees, those bearing fruits and flowers and those bearing only fruits, were surrounded at their bases by jewel studded earth and embraced by various types of creepers. The perfectly shaped, richly foliated trees increased the magnificence of the forest. The tops of the trees were emerald green, their branches were golden, their budding leaves were ruby red, their flower buds were like coral, their blossoming flowers were like diamonds and their fruits were like vaidurya gems. The groves of trees radiated brilliance in all directions. The trees reflected in the jeweled sand and the rivers rushing down Govardhana Hill. The towering trees made friends with all varieties of birds. Throughout the year, Vṛndāvana’s trees acted as desire trees to satisfy the wants of all. The forest looked marvelous with its black soil, its many mandapas (platforms) beneath the trees, its jeweled pavilions and the jeweled earth, which featured jeweled shoots springing spontaneously from its surface. Vṛndāvana was not created by Brahma; it is Rādhā-Mādhava’s eternal spiritual abode. Some parts of the forest, due to the abundance of emeralds lying on the ground, appeared to be covered with green carpets. The deer mistook these “carpets” for tender shoots of grass and eagerly ran there. Patches of rubies covered small areas of the forest. In the winter season, the cāmari deer stood on the patches, thinking they were the warm rays of the morning sun. The finest crystal covered some areas.

/Q: The sambara, afflicted by summer’s heat, gathered there, thinking it was the cooling rays of the moon. Blue sapphires blanketed some parts of the forest. The owls, fearing the rays of the rising summer sun, took shelter there, thinking it was darkness. The goddess of the forest (Vana Lakṣmī), who is dear to the six seasons, served Kṛṣṇa by her beauty. She adorned her neck with a string of pearls in the form of the flower buds of spring. She decorated herself with the mallikā blossoms of summer. She bore her breasts as the clusters of kadamba flowers in the monsoon season. In autumn, she smiled with bunches of lotus blossoms. She wore the lodhra flowers of the dewy season as earrings. She was most pleasing to behold in the dewy season with her braid in the form of madhukara (honeybees) bound by a string of damanaka flowers. The trees of the forest supplied many items for Kṛṣṇa’s worship. Dew drops served as Kṛṣṇa’s foot wash, fresh grass shoots were His arghya, honey was the ācamana, the best of fragrances were the candana, the best of flowers were the flower offerings, an ascending line of bees was the incense and the beautiful buds were the lamps. The trees offered naivedya to Kṛṣṇa with the ripened fruits that had fallen on the ground. The creepers, being instructed in various movements by their dance guru, the fickle breeze, swayed rhythmically before Kṛṣṇa. The bees hummed the backup vocals and the creepers responded by spreading their leaf-like hands to express the meaning of the songs. Various parts of their bodies erupted with joy. The huge clusters of breast-like buds displayed their shyness and submissiveness, while the blossoming flowers expressed their smiles of joy. One shy creeper covered her flower smile with her leaf-like hands. Another creeper, overwhelmed in joy, wept tears of honey. One creeper concealed her beautiful, breast-like bud clusters with cloth in the form of pollen. Another creeper shook the swarms of bees from her body. Some creepers called out to Kṛṣṇa, using the warbling of cuckoos and their leaves waving in the breeze, saying, “Come here, come here!” The creepers smiled with their half-opened blossoms to express their inner joy and eagerness to be with Kṛṣṇa. Some creepers beheld Hari and then cried harshly with the loud sound of woodpeckers. They frowned with the meandering rows of black bees. They released smiles tinged with anger through their flowers. They stated their refusal by fluttering their new leaves and scolded Kṛṣṇa with the chatter of the birds. Śyāma acknowledged the love conveyed by the creepers and bestowed bliss upon the trees who expertly served Him with their fruits and flowers. Kṛṣṇa satisfied the jeweled earth and new sprouts of grass by touching them with His lotus feet as He moved here and there in Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇāhnika- kaumudī 3.43-57 Among the assembled gopīs, Acyuta appeared as splendid as the moon surrounded by the stars. He whose activities are so magnanimous, made their faces blossom with His affectionate glances and His broad smiles revealed the effulgence of his jasmine-bud-like teeth. As the gopīs sang Kṛṣṇa’s praises, that leader of hundreds of women sang loudly in reply. Wearing His Vaijayantī garland, He moved among them, beautifying the Vṛndāvana forest. SB 10.29.43-44 The gopīs, whose slender waists were more charming than that of a lioness, sang about Śyāma’s spotless qualities with sweet voices. As Śyāma fondled the gopīs on the pretext of adorning them with flowers, their desires awoke to enjoy unrestrained amorous pastimes with Him in a secluded

/Q: place. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.28 While wandering along, Kṛṣṇa sometimes sang His own compositions about the moon or the creepers. The sakhīs responded by using the same metaphors to glorify Rādhā-Mādhava’s love. Govinda- līlāmṛta 22.31 The gopīs sang, “The attractive moon has appeared to give us boundless pleasure. The beauty of the moon delights the enchanting eyes of all charming young ladies and it removes the feelings of separation felt by his wives, the stars. The moon enlivens the hearts of the night blooming lotuses.” Śyāma and the gopīs roamed in the serene and pleasurable forest of Vṛndāvana. With His playful touch Śyāma thrilled the creepers and His smiling sweethearts. Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs, followed by buzzing bees, soon arrived at a platform beneath the Vaṁśīvaṭa tree.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.45-46
= P: Niśa-līlā (11:12 p.m.—1:12 a.m.)
-L: The rāsa dance begins
/Q: Kṛṣṇa sat down with the gopīs and gazed upon the meandering Yamunā, who was very happy to see the Lord. Yamunā smiled at Kṛṣṇa with the foam on her surface and sang to Him with the warbling of birds. All of her senses yearned to unite with Kṛṣṇa. She stretched out the hands of her waves to enjoy the happiness of Kṛṣṇa’s touch. Her red lotus eyes blossomed with joy at the sight of Śyāma. Crocodiles appeared as her raised nose attentive to smell Śyāma’s fragrance. Her whirlpool ears spun anxiously waiting to hear Kṛṣṇa’s deep voice and flute song. Kṛṣṇa, admiring the beauty of the Yamunā, desired to enjoy. Standing up, Śyāma moved along the river’s bank with His darling gopīs. Yamunājī repeatedly offered lotus flowers to their lotus feet with her hand-like waves, as if offering respectful obeisances to them by touching their feet. Govinda- līlāmṛta 22.47-50 Kṛṣṇa delighted with the gopīs on the bank of the Yamunā, where the sand was cooling and the wind blowing off the water carried the sweet scent of blooming lotuses. SB 10.29.45 The banks of the Yamunā looked as white as powdered camphor under the rays of the full moon. The sandy banks were purified by Kalindī’s waves and caressed by a lotus-scented breeze. Dāmodara and His band of lovely gopīs strolled here and there searching for a suitable place to sport. Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 17.78 There on the Yamunā’s banks Govinda began His rāsa-līlā in the company of those jewels among women, the faithful gopīs, who joyfully linked their arms together.
/R: SB 10.33.2
-L: Rāsa-līlā
/Q: Kṛṣṇa threw His arms around the gopīs and embraced them. He aroused Cupid in the beautiful young ladies of Vraja by touching their hands, hair, thighs, belts and breasts, by playfully scratching them with His fingernails and also by joking with them, glancing at them and laughing with them. In this way Kṛṣṇa enjoyed His pastimes. SB 10.29.46 Śyāmasundara, spreading His cloud-like effulgence everywhere, rambled on the bank of the Yamunā with the doe-eyed gopīs, glowing like stationary lightning. Kṛṣṇa’s earrings swayed, His garland of mandāra flowers shone, His waist belt and anklets jingled and His cādara slipped off His shoulders.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.30

/Q: With great enthusiasm, Kṛṣṇa started His ecstatic dancing pastimes with the gopīs. Kṛṣṇa revolved at full speed while resting His arms on the left and right shoulders of two gopīs. Then He simultaneously embraced them. Kṛṣṇa then opened a space between the two gopīs and quickly moved behind them. Retracting His arm from one gopī, Kṛṣṇa used the shoulder of the other one to circle around again to face them. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.25 Kṛṣṇa experienced unlimited bliss by rapidly spinning between the pairs of gopīs and embracing them. The combination of the circling gopīs and the singular, dark body of Kṛṣṇa conquered the beauty of brilliant moonlight mixed with darkness, lightning and storm clouds, campaka and blue lotus flowers and gold combined with sapphires. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.31 Kṛṣṇa danced in a small circle around Rādhā, who stood in the middle of the dancers. Kṛṣṇa then expanded the circumference of His circle to dance around the rest of the gopīs. While enjoying His dancing pastimes, Kṛṣṇa appeared like two sapphire necklaces, freed from their threads, in the jewel box of the circle of gopīs. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.33 A tumultuous sound arose from the armlets, ankle bells and waist bells of the gopīs as they sported with their beloved Kṛṣṇa in the circle of the rāsa dance. As the gopīs sang in praise of Kṛṣṇa, their feet stomped, their hands gesticulated and their eyebrows moved with playful smiles. With their braids and belts tied tight, their waists bending, their faces perspiring, the garments on their breasts moving this way and that and their earrings swinging on their cheeks, Kṛṣṇa’s young consorts shone like streaks of lightning in a mass of clouds. SB 10.33.6-7 Many singers, drummers, vīṇā and flute players happily performed there. Karatāla experts kept the rhythm. The embodiments of the performing arts and the Upaniṣads of music attended the rāsa-līla with smiling lotus faces and looks of astonishment. The best dancers displayed their expertise in the folk, mixed and the pure styles. They exhibited proficiency in all the secrets of music and graceful movements just as a poet turns ordinary words into songs. There are two types of songs, marga (music according to the rules established by Brahmā) and deśī (regional). There are thirty-four types of marga with five beats starting with caccatpuṭa, and forty types of deśī songs. The recitation of beats (bol) sounded most attractive: thāiyā tathāiyā tatha-thāi tathāiyā! thai-thai- thai-thai-thai tathai-thai tathai thā! thāiyā-thāiyā tatha-tatha thāiyā, thāiyā-thāiyā tigada tathāiyā. Following the recitation, the rhythm keepers held karatālas in their hands and moved them left, right, up and down as they sang an attractive new eighth note, though there are only seven notes in the scale. They played at different speeds with or without bol. The turbulent sound raised by the drummers hitting the ends of the drums with their hands made their lips and throats quiver like another musical instrument. The female singers glowed attractively as they turned their ears toward the sound of the instruments, which perfectly vibrated the appropriate rāgas. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.55- 60 The gopīs excitedly uttered the bol, “thāi-thāi tho-tho tigaḍa-tigaḍa tho, tathāi-tho tathāi-thā.” They stomped their feet on the ground, raised their arms in the air and turned artfully from left to right while dancing around the circumference of the circle. The gopīs enhanced the relish of their singing by forming hand mudrās to illustrate the words of the songs. Their feet kept the rhythm and their gracefully turning necks expressed the sounds and beats. The gopīs, their restless eyes darting from right to left according to the tempo, glanced at Kṛṣṇa with looks of love. They did everything simultaneously with equal fervor in each of their limbs.

/Q: The gopīs extended their hands into the air and shook their bangles while stepping carefully and spinning around joyfully with lightning speed. The lovely gopīs, strung on the thread of the waves of beauty emanating from Kṛṣṇa standing in the center of the rāsa circle, flawlessly and continuously moved their feet to the left and right without respite. They joyfully stomped their feet to the beat “dhī dhī dhī dhī tadhī dhī,” while their bodies swayed in time and their jeweled ankle bells jingled. The cloth covering their breasts slipped off as they swung their arms around dancing in joy, twisting left and right symmetrically without fear that their thin waists would snap in half. The vīṇā and flute players danced along euphorically with precision steps. The singers and rhythm keepers moved according to the beat of the song. The drummers pounded loudly and danced in unison. It appeared that their bodies were tied by a thread to the bodies of the dancing gopīs. When Kṛṣṇa turned to the left while moving around the rāsa circle, the gopīs turned to the right. And when Kṛṣṇa turned to the right, they turned to the left. There was no end to the whirling dance wherein Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs moved either in the same or opposite directions. Kṛṣṇa and the dancing gopīs appeared to be figures spotlighted by a moving lamp, which cast shadows first on one side and then the other, as the combination of dark blue Kṛṣṇa and golden-limbed gopīs repeatedly reversed their positions. The instrumentalists, situated outside the circle, assisted the pastime of the Lord by playing in time with the gopīs’ movements. Somehow, the songs became diverted. The gopīs sang about the moon named Kṛṣṇa (Kṛṣṇacandra), the embodiment of all pleasure. In response, Kṛṣṇa glorified the beautiful moon which fills the night with pleasurable rays. As the beat picked up and the gopīs stomped their feet harder, drops of perspiration fell from their lotus feet like honey dripping on the sand. Astonishingly, the fury of the dancing did not raise a speck of dust. Had all the particles of dust become stunned in bliss? The image of Kṛṣṇa’s dancing form, reflecting on the gopīs’ tilaka, swayed to the rhythm of the dancing gopīs as they rocked their heads back and forth. The gopīs seemed to address Kṛṣṇa’s reflection, “O skillful dancer! Your dancing can never, never, never compare with the splendid dancing of the gopīs in the rāsa-maṇḍala!” Some lotus-eyed gopīs, their hair standing on end from the joy of embracing Kṛṣṇa, danced and loudly sang a special rāga to convey their intense longing. All the devatās of music fainted upon hearing the rāga. One gopī sang pure melodious tones with full feeling in the pleasant gāndhāra scale attended by the appropriate jāti, śruti and gamakas. Kṛṣṇa cheered, “Excellent, Excellent” in appreciation of her performance. She further pleased Kṛṣṇa by singing the seven notes of the scale embellished with twenty-two śrutis presented with the principle ornaments in the introductory passages (alapa). The mṛdaṇgas relentlessly pounded “tā dhik tā dhik-dhik” (meaning: The heavenly dancers are useless!). Hearing this, the dancers in heaven smiled with glee. Though usually critical of competition, the celestial artists filled with delight upon hearing the rebuke. Mukunda, His glossy black hair crowned with a peacock feather, showered the rasa dance with a cloudburst of nectarean prema by embracing Rādhā. Śrīmatī Rādhikā appeared to be the perfect medicine produced by the goddess of arts to bring full satisfaction and to remove all lamentation. As Śyāma danced joyfully with Rādhā, He looked like a tamāla tree embraced by a golden creeper or a rain cloud flashing with lightning. Kṛṣṇa’s incomparably handsome body conquered the pride of a million Cupids. As Śyāma danced with Rādhikā, He attracted the iron tips of Cupid’s arrows of love like a powerful magnet. Rādhā

/Q: moved in rhythm with Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs wanted to enhance Rādhā’s skilfull dancing, however, they could not match Rādhā’s proficiency in singing, dancing or playing instruments. Rādhā-Mādhava, overcome with attraction, joy, enthusiasm and a desire to outdo each other, sang the alapa (introductory part) with the initial note (graha) and variations on the sixth note. Rādhā- Mādhava sang all the notes of the ascending and descending scales with gamaka (trills or wavering). This invoked various tastes, induced more singing and dancing and spread auspiciousness all around. It was not a manifestation of any material skill. As the rhythms faded out just before the end of the song, Kṛṣṇa concluded it with the final note (nyasa), extending His lotus hand (nyasa) to touch Rādhikā’s breast. Although intrigued by Kṛṣṇa’s clever behavior, Rādhā pretended to be angry and pushed Kṛṣṇa’s hand away with Her left lotus hand. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.67-87 Kṛṣṇa played an amazing rāga in the gāndhāra scale on His flute. It so much surpassed His previous songs that even the best musicians could not touch it. The devatās sang along accompanied by mṛdaṇgas. One gopī, the very form of the art of dance, abruptly appeared amidst the singers, who blended their voices with the instruments in a most pleasant way. The gopī, like the center of a flower surrounded by golden petals, seemed to be the deity of music manifesting to the clanging of musical instruments as the previous beat dissipated. She had a very thin waist and heavy swollen breasts. She flexed her knees and then raised her delicate left and right hands by bending at the elbows. She showed the ardhendu (half-moon) and padmakosa (lotus bud) mudrās at the level of her hips, while glancing slowly from right to left. Her body, perspiring profusely, appeared as soft as molten wax as she gracefully executed the most difficult dance steps. Following the standard sequence, she extended and contracted her arms while touching her waist, forehead, neck and knees and forming mudrās such as haṁsāsya. The dancing made her waist more slender and her breasts more firm. Her braid licked her heels and the three folds of skin on her belly disappeared. When the beat stopped she waved her hands in the air and suddenly leaned backwards to conquer the beauty of the campaka flower bow of Cupid. She fixed her knees firmly on the ground, stretched her arms out to the sides and twirled around with lightning speed. Her ornaments jingled loudly and her necklace and earrings swung. Swarms of bees circled around her mouth, attracted by its fragrance. She appeared like a golden wheel spun rapidly by a mad potter. The combination of her red lips, the black bees and her lustrous golden necklace made an extraordinary picture. Kneeling down, the gopī dug her toes into the earth and sat on her upraised heels. While contracting her belly her sash slipped off. She inhaled deeply to expand her breasts. She clenched her fists and pressed her thumbs against her breasts while reciting the bol, “tatha thāi-thāi tathāi-thāi tathā thā!” Her bangles and ankle bells jingled in unison with the beat. As the voices, vīṇās, flutes, karatālas and mṛdaṇgas continued the song, the gopī, feeling completely fatigued, stood up, walked behind the singers and rested her arms on the shoulders of a friend. She refreshed herself with some betel nut while one sakhī untied the ankle bells from her feet. Some other sakhīs fanned her with their shawls to remove her fatigue. Her breasts heaving, she took a few deep breaths and rested.

/Q: One gopī with beautiful teeth, firm breasts and nicely shaped buttocks, waved her hands to excite her golden bracelets to jingle attractively. She raised her knees and arms in time with the beat, “tat-tā tā- thāi tiki-dā tiki-thāi.” The golden gopī gradually stood from a squatting position. She appeared like a continually rising golden light as she twisted and turned higher and higher. She appeared like a stream of golden pollen stirred up by a storm amongst a group of lotuses appearing as singers and musicians. As the gopī swayed in the sky like a glowing vine, she displayed many complicated movements. Indeed, she did not learn this from a dance teacher. Her dancing feet, the essence of gracefulness, did not appear to touch the ground. If a group of lightning bolts in a cloudless sky could remain for a long time swaying in the breeze while roaring the beat “tat-tā thāiyā,” it might compare with the gopi’s dancing. As the beat subsided and her footsteps slowed down, the gopī, who had heavy breasts, began to sway back and forth. The sakhīs feared that her thin waist, unable to bear the bending, would break like a tender lotus stem. The gopīs, feeling both tired and extremely satisfied from the blissful rāsa dance, opened their bodices and rested their arms on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.95- 12 When one gopī grew tired from the rāsa dance, she turned to Kṛṣṇa, standing at her side holding a baton and grasped His shoulder with her arm. The dancing had loosened her bracelets and the flowers in her hair. SB 10.33.10 The gopīs looked as gorgeous as golden creepers hanging on the branches of a tamāla tree caressed by the breeze. Kṛṣṇa, embraced by the exhausted gopīs, appeared to be the condensed form of conjugal rasa embraced by the embodiments of ecstasy. One gopī, with swaying necklaces, lotus bud earrings and an elegant dress, put her left arm on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulder. As her waist belt and ankle bells chimed along, she sang and danced in a slow, artistic manner. Kṛṣṇa followed her movements while dancing and singing. One love-excited, lotus-eyed gopī grabbed the border of Kṛṣṇa’s golden dhotī with her lotus hand and danced back and forth while pulling it and Kṛṣṇa too. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20. 13- 15 One gopī, joining Mukunda in His singing, sang pure melodious tones that rose harmoniously above His. Kṛṣṇa was pleased and showed great appreciation for her performance, saying “Excellent! Excellent!” Another gopī repeated the same melody, but in a special metrical pattern and Kṛṣṇa praised her also. SB 10.33.9 Another gopī, charged with emotion, sang and danced in an even tempo, responding to the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. In a mood of jest, Kṛṣṇa intentionally played out of time. With her chastising glances the gopī said, “Kṛṣṇa! You are playing out of time to distract me and point out my faults. I know Your tricks. But You will not be able to make me miss the beat!” One gopī danced enthusiastically for a while to Śyāma’s flute song. She then induced Kṛṣṇa to dance boldly by singing and playing her vīṇā. In the middle of the dance, Kṛṣṇa agitated her just for fun by moving with a complicated, irregular gait. The gopī became very impatient, thinking, “Kṛṣṇa is trying to make me laugh and miss the beat!” Kṛṣṇa satisfied all the young damsels of Vraja by embracing them, glancing lovingly at them with His playful smiles, kissing them and drinking the nectar of their lips. All the gopīs present at the rāsa-maṇḍala got a chance to dance and enjoy personally with Kṛṣṇa. The gopī group leaders, their followers and maidservants all relished incomparable ecstasy in the

/Q: rāsa dance festival. A friendly sakhī named fatigue personified appeared to decorate the gopīs’ foreheads with beads of perspiration that looked like attractive strings of pearls. Their limbs hung loosely from lethargy as if they were drunk. The gopīs, even in their exhaustion, however, looked most elegant and effulgent. One gopī, her body drooping from weariness, slung her arms over Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders. She could not bear the mountainous weight of her good fortune, so she loaded it on the shoulders of her lover in order to rest for some time. One gopī thought the reflection of Kṛṣṇa’s ruby earrings on her cheek was a betel nut stain from Kṛṣṇa’s kiss. In her delusion, she repeatedly tried to wipe it off with her dress. Ānanda-vṛndāvana- campū 20. 16-122 Rati-mañjarī pointed toward Rādhā and said, “O sakhī! Look! Rādhā is resting Her right hand on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulder and holding Her left hand on Her hip. Rādhā’s legs are bent limply and Her head is lowered. Rādhā seems to be tired from the rāsa dance.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.20 Vṛndā said, “O sakhī! The exquisitely beautiful gopīs, stumbling with fatigue from their exuberant dancing, are resting their lotus hands on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders. They are covered in perspiration and their curly locks hang loosely on their foreheads.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 13.20 The ear ornaments of the lotus-eyed gopīs became damp with drops of perspiration. Their dancing speed slowed down and their jeweled ankle bells finally stopped tinkling. It appeared that their ankle bells had become completely exhausted. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.126 The celestial ladies watching from their airplanes talked among themselves: “O ladies! The gopīs manifested a nectar river of love for Kṛṣṇa during the rāsa dance. Their flowing tears were the river’s currents. Their trembling bodies formed the waves and whirlpools. Their ecstatic choked voices resembled chortling swans. Their joyfullly erect bodily hair looked like schools of playful fish in the river. Their blissfully stunned bodies were the cooling spray from the river. The gopīs’ faces, blossoming in transcendental bliss, were the lotus flowers growing in that river.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.160 The doe-eyed girls with delicate, creeper-like arms swam in the river of desire for Kṛṣṇa, inundated by the delight of directly serving Him. In the gopīs’ ecstasy, their hair, bodices and clothing had unknowingly loosened.
/R: Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.130
= P: Niśa-līlā (1:12 a.m.—1:36 a.m.)
-L: Rest and more dancing
/Q: Hari, with His tender lotus hand, affectionately wiped the drops of perspiration from the beautiful smiling faces of the gopīs, tired from many love sports. Kṛṣṇa’s touch stimulated their minds with lust and made the gopīs perspire even more! The gopīs, experiencing Kṛṣṇa’s lack of expertise, took pieces of cloth and wiped their own faces. The gopīs fully exhibited their talents in performing enthralling dances. Then they sang some unique, original compositions, which were full of charm, feeling and exquisite beauty. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.133-135 When Rādhā-Mādhava stopped dancing, the mañjarīs refreshed them by fanning with cāmaras, rearranging Their ornaments, applying sandalwood paste and giving Them betel leaves.
/R: Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 19.80

/Q: Rādhā-Śyāma walked to another bank of the Yamunā to perform a second rāsa dance. The rāsa- maṇḍala, named Cakra Bhrāmaṇa, rested on a pivot eighteen inches above the ground. The gopīs kept Rādhā-Śyāma in the center and formed three concentric circles around Them. As Śyāma tightly embraced Rādhikā, He looked like a tamāla tree entwined by a golden creeper. The three rings of gopīs appeared like golden canals irrigating the tamāla tree’s roots with a flood of nectar. On Kṛṣṇa’s order, Lalitā and other sakhīs began the Hallisaka (ladies circular dance). Rādhā- Mādhava, the masters of dance, put Their arms on each other’s shoulders and danced in their midst. The rāsa-maṇḍala rotated like a potter’s wheel from the touch of the gopīs’ skillful footsteps. When the maṇḍala rotated rapidly the gopīs danced swiftly, and when it moved slowly they danced leisurely. The gopīs thus pleased Kṛṣṇa by their different types of dancing. Acyuta stood Rādhā between Lalitā and Viśākhā and made Rādhā rest Her arms on their shoulders. The other gopīs sang and danced around them. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa joined them. Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself, stood between each pair of gopīs and held His hands on their shoulders. It seemed that many dark tamāla trees, entwined with golden creepers, were dancing together. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.57- 63 One sakhī, appreciating the astonishing dance, said to another, “Though Kṛṣṇa is only one, He stands between two gopīs with His hands on their shoulders. One sakhī clutches Kṛṣṇa’s hand as He dances in the rāsa-līlā.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 15.232 Occasionally Kṛṣṇa circled the gopīs so quickly that He looked like a whirling firebrand. By the influence of Yogamaya each gopī thought that Kṛṣṇa was only with her. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.64 Mādhava and the sakhīs wanted to enjoy a special rāsa-līlā. They stepped off the maṇḍala and walked along the bank of the Yamunā to a place called Anaṅgollasa-raṅga (arena of jubilant conjugal sports). The location was ideal for the mahā rāsa-līlā. It was cleansed by the hands of the Yamunā’s gentle waves, bathed by soothing moonlight and cooled by a breeze perfumed with lotus pollen. The moving circle of golden-limbed gopīs at the rāsa maṇḍala looked like the golden potter’s wheel of the artisan named Cupid, which was being rotated by a stick in the form of Hari in order to fashion a clay pot of rāsa. A fisherman ties floats to his net and casts it into the water to catch fish. Similarly, the circle of gopīs was like a great golden net, ringed with the gourd floats of their plump breasts, cast by the fisherman named Cupid to catch the fish of Kṛṣṇa’s mind. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.71-72 If many streaks of lightning could rest within a myriad of whirling rain clouds, still it could not match the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s many forms moving about the rāsa circle with His arms resting on the shoulders of the gorgeous gopīs. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.74 The sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, the gopīs’ enchanting songs and the tinkling of their bangles, ankle bells and waist bells blended with the rhythms of their dancing feet to cover the whole universe with intense rapture. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.76 Kṛṣṇa danced euphorically with the Vraja-gopīs to the beats of rati-līlā, tribhaṅgi, carcarī and vīra- vikrama. Govinda-līlāmṛta 22.63 Kṛṣṇa and His sweethearts sang different songs in novel rhythms while dancing with superb expertise. Rādhā-Śyāma danced a duet while Lalitā’s group sang and Citrā’s sakhīs sustained the beat with their musical instruments. Vṛndā and others watched in amazement. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa danced alone while Rādhikā and other sakhīs melodiously sang wonderfully complicated tunes. Kṛṣṇa greatly admired the

/Q: dancing of Rādhikā and Her sakhīs who danced one by one with fantastic steps and captivating gestures. The gopīs, sitting beside the rāsa-maṇḍala singing and playing musical instruments, looked like a curtain surrounding the dancers. Although the individual notes of the drums, flutes, vīṇās, cymbals and voices played simultaneously, the music harmonized perfectly with the dance steps of Śyāma and the gopīs. One after another each gopī displayed her skill in dancing with artistic mudrās, provocative eye gestures, fluttering eyebrows and spectacular footsteps. Kṛṣṇa repeatedly entered the circle of gopīs and danced with the most intricate steps and flowing hand movements. Śyāma excited the gopīs by calling out the beats, “tat-tā tat-the—dṛgiti dṛgithāi— dṛk tathāi dṛk—tathāi thā.” Continuing to dance, Kṛṣṇa proclaimed, “tho dik dong-dong kiṭa-kiṭa- kaṇa jheng—thokku tho dikku āre—jheng drong jheng drong kiṭi-kiṭi-kiṭi-dhong—jheṅku-jheng jheṅku-jheng jheng—tho dik dong-dong dṛimi-dṛimi-dṛimi dhong—kāṅku jheng kāṅku jheng drām!” Rādhikā danced like a lightning strike in the Kṛṣṇa cloud. Her bangles, waist bells and ankle bells jingled enchantingly as She moved Her arms and boldly exclaimed, “tatha thāi-thāi tathāi-thāi tathāi thā!” Dancing on and on, Śrīmatī ecstatically recited, “dhong-dhong dik-dik chada-chada nidong—nong nidong nong nidong nong! tut-tuk tung-tung gudu-gudu-gudu dhong—drong gudu- drong gudu-drong! dhek-dhek dho-dho kiriti-kiriti drong—drimi-drong drimi drong!” Lalitā entered the arena, which was tinted dark blue by Kṛṣṇa’s effulgence, jingling her gold bangles “jhung, jhung, jhung!” Lalitā danced while smiling and loudly chanting, “thāi-thāi tho-tho tigaḍa- tigaḍa tho—tathāi-tho tathāi thā.” Viśākhā adroitly danced in harmony with the vīṇās’ vibration of “kaṇa-kaṇa-kaṇa” and the mrḍaṅgas’ pounding of “dṛmi-dṛmi-dṛmi, dho-dho-dho.” Her ornaments jingled “jhuṇana jhun- jhut” as Viśākhā uttered “dṛgiti-dṛgiti dṛik-thai tho tatho tho!” Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.1- 1 While delighting in the dancing of the Vraja-gopīs, Kṛṣṇa danced slowly and happily sang the vowel sounds in various muscial ways: “Ā ā ī āti ā āti, ai ati a ā, āti ā āti ā ā ā ā! Look Rādhikā! The moonlit bank of Yamunā is dancing with Us! Ā ā ā āti ā ā! And the forest is dancing along with the soft breeze. Ā ā ā ā eti!” Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.15 As the gopīs immersed themselves in the splendor of the rāsa dance, their blouses, braids and undergarments loosened. Kṛṣṇa danced beside each gopī and quickly arranged their clothes. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.19 The Vraja-gopīs continued to express their love for Śyāma by dancing, singing beautiful songs portrayed with mudrās, keeping the beat with their feet, bending their necks, shaking their hips and moving their eyes back and forth. All the while, the gopīs were lost in erotic rapture fixing their attention on Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.24 One gopī, observing the spectacular performance, said to another, “O sakhī! Look! Murāri sings the name of Rādhā by pressing His red lips on the first hole of the flute. Waves of light emanate from His fingernails and sparkling rings as He deftly moves His delicate fingers over the holes of His flute.” Saṅgīta-mādhava 18 Viśākhā pointed out Kṛṣṇa’s flute playing to Rādhā: “O golden one! Where the flute touches Kṛṣṇa’s splendid teeth, it looks like a crystal wand; where it touches Kṛṣṇa’s red lotus palm it looks like a

/Q: stick made of rubies; where it touches Śyāma’s blue lotus cheek it appears to be made of sapphires. How astonishing! Murāri’s flute seems to be made of three different jewels.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 10.34 Whenever the last beat would fall, Kṛṣṇa would playfully try to touch Rādhā’s breasts. Though intrigued with Hari’s clever behavior, Rādhā would feign anger and expertly block Hari’s hand with Her left hand in time with the music. One gopī placed her feet firmly on the ground, extended her long arms and whirled around like the golden cakra of Cupid. Another young gopī repeatedly extended and contracted her arms. She displayed many difficult poses while touching her various bodily limbs. One gopī did cartwheels by supporting herself on the ground with her hands and rotating her whole body in the air. Touching the ground again with her feet, she continued to dance. As she danced and jumped, it seemed that her feet were not even touching the ground. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.30-33 At the end of the rāsa dance, Kṛṣṇa enjoyed the sight of the gopīs’ loosened hair and clothing, their breasts heaving up and down with their deep breaths, their cheeks and foreheads beautified with drops of perspiration and their lovely bodies limp from exhaustion. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.41 Thus Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs concluded their superbly tasteful rāsa festival with its variegated pastimes of music, singing and dancing. Vṛndā, observing Govinda’s eagerness to enjoy conjugal pastimes with the gopīs, took them to a secluded place beside the Yamunā. Vṛndā sat Rādhā and Acyuta on the cool sand, which was spotless as powdered camphor, and then engaged the sakhīs in various services.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.48-49
= P: Niśa-līlā (1:36 a.m.—2:00 a.m.)
-L: Drinking party
/Q: As the time of Cupid’s battle approached, the bliss of drinking honey wine spontaneously appeared on the spotless banks of the Yamunā, which sparkled like camphor. The charming spot was cleansed by the wind bearing the fragrance of lotuses and water lilies and lit by the rays of the moon. Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 20.87 Vṛndā-devī, in great happiness, arranged all the ingredients for the drinking pastime. She set crystal wine glasses on a beautiful platform made of cat’s eye gems, which was covered by a handsome silk cloth, shining like the moon. Vṛndā brought crystal decanters full of honey liquor, which blinded the bees with its aroma and tasty appetizers covered with a silk cloth. Long garlands of fragrant flowers embraced the necks of the decanters. The decanters of liquor appeared like treasure chests full of the jewels of love sports. Kṛṣṇa and His joyful sakhīs appreciated the excellent arrangements of Vṛndā-devī, who was especially empowered to fulfill Kṛṣṇa’s desires. Induced by the sakhīs, Vṛndā held Kṛṣṇa’s hand and lovingly sat Him on a jeweled platform beside Rādhikā. The gopīs, whose exquisite bodies radiated elegance in all directions, took Kṛṣṇa’s permission and sat down in rows near the Divine Couple. It seemed the moonlight had become a huge bangle to encircle the bodies of the gorgeous gopis. Rādhā-Madhava and their entourage of confidential girlfriends appeared like a dark blue rain cloud ornamented with lightning and surrounded by a lattice of moonlight. Śyāma submerged the sakhīs in an ocean of ecstasy as He enthusiastically initiated the drinking festival. All the vyabhicari bhāvas (transitory emotions) headed by shyness, eagerness, remembrance, thoughtfulness, steadiness, tolerance, jubilation, envy, worry, fear, fatigue, madness and their assistants arrived one by one to

/Q: serve the youthful couple at the appropriate time. Rādhā-Mādhava sat on an elegant seat before the assembly of sakhīs. Vṛndā adorned Their necks with garlands she had personally strung with varieties of exceptional flowers. The intoxicating fragrance of the flower garlands drove the bees mad. Vṛndā saturated the air with clouds of black aguru incense mixed with piles of crushed camphor. The trees, under Vṛndā’s direction, showered flowers upon the forest floor at the beginning of the drinking festival. The bees stuck their sharp goad like heads into the mallikā flowers and buzzed loudly like Cupid’s conch. Clusters of sweet smelling creepers swayed back and forth, having been taught from childhood by their dance teacher, the wind. The glittering crystal goblets competed with the moonlight in such a way that Vṛndā became confused as she filled them with honey liquor. For a moment a doubt crossed her mind: “Did I really fill the goblet with honey liquor, or did I pour it on the ground? I am really not sure.” Vṛndā offered the sparkling crystal goblets to Rādhā-Syama with her right hand while waving a blue lotus flower over the goblets with her left hand to ward off the bees eager to taste the aromatic honey liquor. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 6.38-48 The crystal goblets of flower wine looked very attractive with the reflection of the moon inside, the swarms of intoxicated bees circling overhead and the sweet fragrance of full blown lotuses emanating from it. Everyone knows that drinking honey wine produces amazing effects. With the first sip the eyes become bloodshot, with the second sip speaking coherently stops and the third sip makes a person fearful of harmless objects and fearless before danger. The gopīs, being well aware of these side effects, were very reluctant to drink the honey wine and display such amusing symptoms for Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. The adorable faces of Rādhā-Govinda looked like a nectar-filled moon combined with a honey-filled lotus. Drops of betel nut juice stained Their lips with an attractive reddish hue. Rādhā-Govinda drank the honey wine along with sipping the nectar of each other’s lips. One gopī, detecting the moon’s reflection in her glass, asked, “Hey sakhī! Is the moon drinking my liquor?” A sober mañjarī who was fanning her replied, “He is not only drinking your wine, he is stealing the beauty of your face as well. It has already gone down his throat. Quickly bite him with your teeth, for he is immortal anyway.” The gopī replied, “Oh, I will not drink his leftovers!” After taking a sip, she threw away the glass. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.160-164 Rādhā-Mādhava, whose radiant auras filled all directions, shooed away the bees hovering over Their goblets while Vṛndā distributed honey wine to all the sakhīs participating in the drinking party. Kṛṣṇa lifted His cup to Rādhā’s lips and said, “First You drink some then give it to Me.” Rādhā bowed Her head and just smelled the cup without tasting the liquor. Then She offered it to Kṛṣṇa. It appeared Rādhikā was giving some secret instruction in the science of conjugal love. Śyāma relished the fragrance of Rādhā’s lotus face on the cup as He slowly drank the honey liquor. For a few minutes He sat still rapt in thought. Suddenly Śyāma burst out with a belly laugh before drinking again with great gusto. Rādhā, as if reading the most confidential book on prema, smiled and bowed Her head in shyness to convey Her desire to drink the honey nectar from Kṛṣṇa’s cup. Rādhā had no desire to drink from Her own cup. Beaming a charming smile, Mādhava gave His affectionate consent. He then offered Rādhikā the nectar of His lips saying, “Please drink!”

/Q: Rādhā relished the drink and then imbibed from Her own glass. Kṛṣṇa lifted His glass and drank some more. The sakhīs smilingly said, “Oh, such actions are not astonishing in the presence of Their intense love.” Vṛndā joyfully offered another round of honey liquor to Rādhā-Śyāma. They sipped a little and offered the rest to the sakhīs. The sakhīs swallowed some and then drank from their own glasses. Rādhā-Śyāma and the gopīs completed the first round of drinking. As everyone’s hearts melted in bliss, they manifested unlimited changes beginning with reddening of the eyes. For some sakhīs, one drink was enough to completely satisfy their desires. They did not drink again despite the requests of their friends. They wanted to witness Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of intoxication with the other gopīs, who displayed many auspicious moods during the drinking party. The gopīs exhibited symptoms such as baseless fear, inappropriate shame, unnecessary weeping, quarreling without a cause, uncalled for agony, seeing without an object and speaking without a listener. They showed signs of inebriety such as fumbling speech, stuttering, unsteady hearts, constantly squinting eyes, quivering bodies, anger, silence, torpor, satisfaction, laughing, irrational speech and loss of discrimination. One gopī could not see her crystal goblet in the brilliant moonlight, so she thought Vṛndā had not served her any honey wine. As a result, she displayed worry, anger, pride, laughter, detachment and unsteadiness. Another gopī, overwhelmed with pride, refused to drink. One sakhī said, “Look sakhīs! The moon is in my glass! So how can I drink the liquor? Oh, if I chew it I will have trouble. The glass of honey wine has become foul smelling due to being touched by the spots on the moon. I feel it is completely wrong to drink this liquor.” One befuddled gopī, seeing a shadow in her glass from a swarm of bees passing overhead, thought it was some contamination in her drink. She bent her index finger, stirred it around in the glass and strained the drink with a cloth. Picking up the glass, she heartily drank again and again. “O how disastrous! The sky is f-f-falling. The e-e-earth is m-m-m-moving. O friends! H-h-h-h-hold me up, I am falling over.” Stuttering like this, one drunken sakhī embraced her friend, who said in a sweet voice, “Oh friend! I am very healthy, therefore, I will live a long time!” The state of identifying oneself as a lover feeling separation suddenly appeared as a by-product of drinking the liquor. The Divine Couple reversed Their identities. Kṛṣṇa acted like Rādhā and Rādhā acted like Kṛṣṇa. They spoke to each other while mildly laughing. Rādhā said to Kṛṣṇa, “O Rādhā!” Kṛṣṇa replied, “O Kṛṣṇa!” Rādhā said, “Are You My servant? No, You are My very life. Without You, I cannot sustain My body.” The affectionate words Rādhā-Mādhava shared while briefly reversing Their roles were most attractive to the mind. Rādhā-Mādhava whispered soft meaningless sentences in each other’s ears. They laughed, stumbled, rolled about and kissed each other on the cheeks. Rādhā-Mādhava did not feel the least bit of fatigue in each other’s association. Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha somehow disappeared among His necklaces and garlands. Not seeing the jewel, Rādhā worried and tried to help find it by mentioning, “Hey Kṛṣṇa! Where is Your Kaustubha?”

/Q: Kṛṣṇa replied, “You stole it!” Rādhā said, “I did not, Viśākhā took it.” Viśākhā interjected, “Why should I take it? Lalitā is the culprit!” Lalitā blurted, “I didn’t do it, Indulekha stole Your gem.” Kṛṣṇa and the drunken gopīs started quarreling over the theft of the Kaustubha gem. One sakhī shouted, “Hey cheater! Your crafty Vaijayantī garland, desiring sole control of Your heart, stole the jewel.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “You are right! O tricky garland! So you stole My Kaustubha and now you will be punished! O thief, please return My jewel.” Kṛṣṇa then beat His Vaijayantī garland until the Kaustubha gem suddenly appeared. Everyone laughed upon seeing it reappear around Kṛṣṇa’s neck. The doe-eyed gopīs submerged in the strong eddies within the current of the unfathomably sweet river of Śyāma’s drinking pastimes. A few talented gopīs sang melodiously while their friends demonstrated their songs with dancing. In this way, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs made Cupid successful with their kissing and embracing. Kṛṣṇāhnika-kaumudī 6.49-69 Kṛṣṇa, suffering from the dual intoxication of honey wine and Cupid’s arrows, held Rādhā’s hand and led Her to a splendid play bed in a kuñja on the bank of the Yamunā. Vṛndā escorted the sakhīs, whose wide-open eyes rolled from intoxication and the arousal of amorous desires, to individual kuñjas to take rest.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.52-53
-L: Rādhā-Mādhava’s intimate pastimes
/Q: Hari affectionately stroked the beautiful limbs of Rādhikā. As buds and flowers flutter uncontrollably in the gentle wind of spring, Rādhikā’s divine body trembled in delight as Kṛṣṇa’s tender touch invoked the flower arrows of Cupid. As the spring breeze enlivens the bees, the sakhīs enjoyed seeing Kṛṣṇa serving Rādhā’s splendid form. As the spring breeze makes the cuckoos warble, the thrill of Kṛṣṇa’s touch made Rādhā coo softly in bliss. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.15 Rādhā told Her sakhī, “When Kṛṣṇa ripped off My clothes, I loosened My long braid and covered the front of My body with it. Remembering that, I now feel ashamed. At that time, My body was like the moon on eighth night of the waning phase; with the front part of My body being dark and the back portion being light.” Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.71 The sakhīs spoke among themselves about Rādhā-Mādhava’s amorous affairs: “When Kṛṣṇa forcefully embraced Her, Rādhā scratched Him with Her fingernails. Rādhā protected Herself with Her arms when Kṛṣṇa tried to bite Her lips, When Kṛṣṇa tried to remove Her blouse, Rādhā bopped Him with a blue lotus flower. Rādhā-Mādhava tasted more joy in these dealings than They experienced during divine union.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 16.254 It appeared that a dark rain cloud was covering a golden mountain whenever Śyāma embraced Rādhā’s breasts. It seemed that the sun (Kṛṣṇa’s Kaustubha jewel) had left the blue sky to take shelter between the cloud and the golden mountain. While kissing Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa passionately grasped Her hair, which resembled a peacock’s tail. The jewel binding Rādhā’s braid slipped off and Her loosened hair scattered over Śyāma’s arms. It seemed that a female snake (Rādhā’s braid), in fear of a peacock, had dropped the jewel from its head and taken shelter of a male snake (Kṛṣṇa’s arms). Śrī- govinda-rati-mañjarī 5.92-93

/Q: When Kṛṣṇa embraced Her, Rādhā returned the embrace and when Kṛṣṇa kissed Her, Rādhā kissed Him. When Kṛṣṇa scratched Her, Rādhā scratched Him back. After Rādhikā learned all the fighting arts of Cupid from Kṛṣṇa, She astonished Him with Her expertise, which submerged Śyāma in an ocean of ecstatic bliss. Śrī-govinda-rati-mañjarī 5.75 Rādhā pressed all Her limbs, which were adored by Her maidservants and ornamented with the soft down of love, victory and glory, against Kṛṣṇa’s limbs. Rādhā secretly kissed Kṛṣṇa’s limbs with Her eyes, as if they were Her own. Śrī-govinda-rati-mañjarī 5.43 Lying in a grove by the Yamunā’s shore wonderfully decorated with moonlight, Her restless blue eyes gently closed, Her perspiration carried away by the gentle Malayan breeze and a broken pearl necklace adorning Her swollen breasts, youthful Rādhārāṇī aroused amorous desires within the heart of Hari.
/R: Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.18
-L: Pastimes with other gopīs
/Q: Rādhā-Mādhava’s confidential pastimes have been described. Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with the other gopīs will now be portrayed. Though the gopīs’ love was pure and free from awe and reverence, Kṛṣṇa tinged their pure prema with the passion of Cupid in order to relish the pressure of their firm breasts, to taste the biting of their lips and to feel the scratching of their nails. The gopīs’ actions of obstructing Kṛṣṇa’s advances with their hands to show their shyness, their casting of angry glances without redness in the eyes and their crying without tears, which arose from their vāmya-bhāva, gave Kṛṣṇa immense satisfaction. The gopīs’ incessant criticisms of Kṛṣṇa, which concealed their sweet smiles and words, their blocking hands, their half-hearted preventative measures and their knitted eyebrows, all communicated their false anger. In reality, all these acts expressed their intense attachment to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa, as if desiring to lock them in His heart, surrounded the gopīs with His long, supple arms and forcefully embraced them one by one. Śyāma held their braids in His left hand and raised their chins with His right hand while lovingly gazing at their gentle bashful faces. Kṛṣṇa then happily tasted the nectar of the gopīs’ lips, like a lone bee leisurely engrossed in a cluster of lotus flowers. Kṛṣṇa playfully scratched the gopīs’ lotus-bud breasts with His fingernails, as if relieving the itch of desire that had risen in their hearts. However, this only increased their desire. The breasts of the gopīs looked more attractive when covered with Kṛṣṇa’s nail marks shining with a copper hue. The marks seemed like sprouts arising from the long dormant seeds of attachment sown in their hearts. When Kṛṣṇa’s lotus hand touched their breasts, it moved around in continuous circles. When Kṛṣṇa’s hand touched their long hair braids, it caressed them from end to end. Coming to the broad expanse of the gopīs’ hips, Kṛṣṇa’s hand seemed to tire. Therefore, it took refuge in the lake of their navels, remaining at their slender waists in a contracted state. In the battle of love, the gopīs had attained the highest good fortune of tasting madhurya-rasa in the association of Kṛṣṇa. Thus the Vraja-gopīs showed the utmost indifference to the opulence of all the women within in the three worlds. Ānanda- vṛndāvana-campū 17.2 1-226 Śyāma, unseen by the resting sakhīs, secretly left their bowers, assumed one form and returned to Rādhikā, who smiled mildly upon beholding Him. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.56 After a short time, the sakhīs awoke, quickly dressed and came to Rādhā’s kuñja. The sakhīs felt

/Q: embarrassed when they saw Rādhā smiling and laughing. They lowered their heads and carefully tried to cover the love marks with their garments. Rādhā, seeing their shy smiles and restless eyes, teased them, “My dear sakhīs! Our heroic lover was here with Me and Vṛndā and never went anywhere else. Who has performed Cupid’s dance with you and bruised your tender bodies?” Kṛṣṇa laughed and said, “Don’t You know Rādhā! The deity of personified conjugal love visited every kuñja to enjoy the dance of dalliance with all these damsels. Just see how their beautiful bodies reveal the signs of rati!” The sakhīs replied to Kṛṣṇa’s impudent words with affectionate anger, saying, “Śyāma! Rādhikā made You Her disciple and taught You the art of conjugal dance. Now Rādhā wants to make us Her grand disciples by having You teach us. The scriptures say that anyone who voluntarily becomes a student of a guru is a real disciple. However, You are making disciples by force and that is not proper! Therefore, we are not Your disciples, nor are You our guru! So Your efforts are all in vain!” The gopīs rebuked Rādhā, “O sakhī! O enjoyer! O female snake! We are female mongoose. You are not aware of our pure consciousness. Therefore, You instigated Your black snake husband to make us like You. Why did You needlessly torment us?”
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.56-62
= P: Niśa-līlā (2:00 a.m.—2:24 a.m.)
-L: Water pastimes
/Q: Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs went to the Yamunā to dispel the fatigue from dancing and exhaustive conjugal intimacies. Kṛṣṇa played in the Yamunā just like an intoxicated bull elephant frolics with his consorts. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.63 As the gopīs submerged themselves up to their necks in the Yamunā, the sky filled with the golden lotuses of their faces. The river, upon touching the gopīs’ pot-like breasts, rose in waves to serve those pairs of cakravaka birds. The many slender arms of the gopīs hanging down in the river ap- peared like hundreds of lotus stems. Swarms of black bees rejected the lotus flowers and soared towards the gopīs as soon as they smelled the fragrance of their splendid bodies. The bees appeared like the black Yamunā coming to greet the gopīs. The swans flapping their wings appeared like the Yamunā affectionately fanning the tired gopīs with cāmara whisks. The swarms of black bees hovering above them and showers of white flowers from the devās appeared as if the goddess of the sky was spreading a canopy of dark blue cloth fringed with strings of pearls shaking in the wind. The gopīs kept their beloved Śyāma in the center and made a circle around Him. Holding each other’s hands, they repeatedly slapped the water. Small waves rose from the Yamunā and splashed against Kṛṣṇa’s chest. The waves looked like the hair of Yamunā’s body standing erect in ecstasy. The gopīs interlocked their fingers, filled their hands with water and forcefully splashed Kṛṣṇa. It appeared that Hari had been wounded by the power of Cupid’s water weapon. Kṛṣṇa knew that Cupid’s weapon could not be defeated, so He dove under water to avoid it. With a quick movement of His hand, Kṛṣṇa playfully snatched the sashes of the gopīs. They ran away on the pretext of fear, but Kṛṣṇa pursued them, splashing them with water. Kṛṣṇa soundly defeated the gopīs in the water fight. As booty, Kṛṣṇa grabbed all their necklaces and stashed them under His armpit. Rādhā secretly approached Śyāma from behind, pulled His arm and seized the necklaces. Kṛṣṇa

/Q: chased Her like a lion pursuing a doe. Rādhikā startled when some restless sapharī fish (minnows) brushed against Her legs. Out of fear, Rādhā impulsively clutched Kṛṣṇa’s neck and embraced Him again and again. Kṛṣṇa smiled gently, praising the genuine friendship of the sapharī fish. Rādhikā broke away from Kṛṣṇa’s embrace and tried to hide among the golden lotus flowers. But She was afraid of the deep water. Rādhā looked fearfully when Kṛṣṇa discovered Her hiding place and swam toward Her. Kṛṣṇa sneaked up behind Rādhā and firmly squeezed Rādhā’s breasts as He lifted Her out of the water. The gopīs just stared in amazement at Kṛṣṇa’s behavior. A group of gopīs laughed gleefully as they competed to pick lotus flowers and stems. As Kṛṣṇa happily watched them, His mind gave way to Cupid. While playing the gopīs’ drenched themselves in ghana-rasa (deep water or an intense exchange of love, śṛṅgāra-rasa, erotic love). The kuṅkuma ran off their breasts, their necklaces broke, the kajjala washed off their eyes, their lips lost their red color, their jeweled belts came undone and their hair braids loosened. The luscious beauty of the gopīs doubled as they drowned in the pleasurable waters of madhura-rasa. Ānanda-vṛndāvana- campū 20.139-150 When Kṛṣṇa tried to touch Rādhā’s breasts, She crossed Her arms in front. When Kṛṣṇa threw a lotus stem at Her, Rādhā raised Her arms to deflect it. When Śyāma tried to smell Her sweet lotus face, Kiśorī covered Her face with Her hands. The confidential sakhīs of Rādhā-Mādhava thoroughly relished Their wonderful love dalliance. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.30 Rādhā’s golden waist belt snapped in the water. She then adorned Her belly with a belt made of śaivāla (moss), which looked even more attractive. Natural beauty and causeless love remain the same in any circumstance. Alaṅkāra-kaustubha 5.105 One sympathetic sakhī addressed an unhappy sakhī, “You are enthusiastically playing in the water. But you should stop uprooting the lotuses. Can’t you see that your tender limbs have been injured by the thorns on the lotus stems and your lips have been bitten by some intoxicated bees?” Alaṅkāra- kaustubha 8.149 Viśākhā said to Kṛṣṇa, “O hero! Rādhā’s continuous water splashing has severed Your flower garland. Your hair is disheveled and Your tilaka has vanished. The Kaustubha has surrendered to become the reflection of Your face. Do not be aggrieved, however, because our sakhī would never give distress to a person like You.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 10.152 The gopīs gifted their precious gems and jeweled ornaments to the Yamunā River. Then they fashioned earrings of spotless water lilies, hair ornaments of lotuses, necklaces of lotus stems and belts of śaivāla plants. The sakhīs’ bangles tinkled when they scooped up water in their left hands and slapped them with their right hands to imitate the croaking of frogs. Thus the water pastimes met a fitting close. The golden-hued gopīs rubbed oil on their bodies, bathed in the Yamunā and then came out on its banks. They looked very beautiful in their wet undergarments. When the drops of water fell from their black tresses, it appeared as if the bright rays of the moon, pursued by dense darkness, had retreated in fear and now wept. Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū 20.151-153 Kṛṣṇa’s heart filled with excitement as He eyed the unadorned splendor and natural beauty of the gopīs’ bodies shining through their wet cloth. Śyāma was very eager to enjoy with them. The śyāma- colored Yamunā now appeared white like the Gaṅgā from all the camphor and sandalwood paste that

/Q: had washed off the gopīs’ breasts. Nevertheless, Yamunā was more fortunate than Gaṅgā because Kṛṣṇa happily played there with His most beloved devotees, the darling girls of Vṛndāvana.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.72-73
= P: Niśa-līlā (2:24 a.m.—2:48 a.m.)
-L: Dressing, eating and resting
/Q: Kṛṣṇa and His sweethearts came ashore after amusing themselves in the Yamunā. The mañjarīs dried the sakhīs’ hair and bodies with soft towels and dressed them in clean garments. Vṛndā brought Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs to a golden temple and sat them upon a jewel inlaid platform smothered in flower petals. Varieties of exotic fruits were brought from the nearby desire trees and creepers. Vṛndā’s assistants presented baskets full of colorful cloth, ornaments, unguents, vermilion and red lead as gift offerings to Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. Each basket was marked with the name of a particular gopī. The mañjarīs used the contents of the baskets to dress and ornament Rādhā-Mādhava and the sakhīs in many attractive ways. Hari was the quintessence of madhura-rasa (ujjvala-rasa mūrti) and Rādhā was the personification of the sthāyi-bhāva of madhura-rasa. The moon and its phases are one, but the phases appear in different bodies. Similarly, Rādhā-Mādhava and the gopīs are one, but they expanded into many different forms to increase the taste of rāsa. Rādhā-Govinda and the gopīs massaged each other with the shining oil of affection. Their intimate friendship resembled scented powder. After bathing in the nectar of youth, they dressed themselves in charming effulgences. They adorned each other with the tilaka of good fortune. They anointed one another with the perfume of refined beauty. They painted their limbs with the wonderful minerals of the eight sattvikā (existential) ecstasies, such as inertia, tears and trembling. Their bodily ornaments were the different vyabhicāri-bhāvas such as agitation, indifference, madness and eagerness (kila- kiṇcita, vivvoka, unmāda, utsukā). Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs were fully decorated internally with the various emotional ornaments of ecstatic conjugal love. Yet the expert mañjarīs doubled their beauty by dressing them externally with clothes and jewelry. Rūpa-mañjarī gave everyone sweets such as anaṅga-guṭikā, sīdhu-vilāsa and laḍdus. Vṛndā served an array of juicy forest fruits and honey sweet drinks. Rādhā-Mādhava rinsed Their mouths after eating and entered the temple of love play (keli mandir). Cooling breezes from the Yamunā wafted through the four doors of the temple, which opened in the four directions. The bejeweled walls and floors of the temple glittered like a million suns. The enchanting aroma of aguru incense filled the room. The jeweled bedstead in the middle of the temple was laden with heaps of sweet smelling flower petals covered by a thin, swan-white sheet. Many attractive pillows of various shapes and sizes lay on the bed. Kṛṣṇa happily rested there with Rādhā, the crest-jewel of all His beloveds. Lalitā and Viśākhā sat upon two raised seats on either side of the bed. They happily served tāmbūla to the Divine Couple. Afterwards, these two fortunate sakhīs relished Rādhā-Mādhava’s tāmbūla prasāda.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.74-88
= P: Niśa-līlā (2:48 a.m.—3:12 a.m.)

-L: The mañjarīs serve Rādhā-Mādhava
/Q: Rūpa-mañjarī and Rati-mañjarī massaged Rādhā-Mādhava’s lotus feet and Dhanya sakhī fanned Them with a cāmara. The sakhīs left the temple after serving Rādhā-Mādhava for a short time, and went to sleep in their individual bowers amongst the desire trees and creepers. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.90 While Rādhā-Mādhava rested, two fortunate mañjarīs held the venerable devatās of Their lotus feet on the golden thrones of their thighs. They worshiped those devatās with the pādya (foot wash) of their teardrops. They offered arghya as their hair standing erect in ecstasy, but they feared hurting the Divine Couple’s tender feet with that hair. They offered lotuses in the form of their ruddy lotus palms. They supplied scent with the musk and camphor smeared on their breasts, incense with their breath, lamps with their shining jewel-like nails, garlands with their glances and foodstuffs by touching Their feet with their pomegranate-like breasts. The mañjarīs performed āratrīka with intense love, using their life airs mixed with the camphor lamp of their smiles. The lotus feet of Rādhā-Mādhava appeared like fresh leaf buds sprouting from the golden banana stalks of the mañjarīs’ thighs. The mañjarīs’ bangles jingled like buzzing bees as they moved their hands up and down massaging Rādhā-Mādhava’s red lotus feet. Some maidservants cooled Rādhā-Mādhava with fans crafted from fragrant flowers. It seemed that they wanted to gladden the poets by having their descriptions of their Master’s glories dance before them in personified forms. Two mañjarīs standing on either side of Rādhā-Mādhava gave Them golden betel leaves filled with camphor, nutmeg and cloves. It appeared that two golden creepers, bathed in the ambrosial rays of a pair of spotless moons that had just risen from a bed of flowers, were worshiping those moons with the movements of their leaves. Kṛṣṇa, desirous of enjoying some special pastimes with Rādhā, said, “O My darling! Your mañjarīs must be exhausted since they are perspiring and their eyes are rolling. Let them take some rest. If Your feet are still tired, I will massage them Myself.” The mañjarīs understood that their desires had now been fulfilled. They immediately left the kuñja, just as worshipers leave a temple after doing pūjā and getting a response from the deity.
/R: Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 20.12-20
= P: Niśa-līlā (3:12 a.m.—3:36 a.m.)
-L: Rādhā-Mādhava’s confidential pastimes
/Q: First Kṛṣṇa bathed in the sacred tīrtha of Cupid, but He shivered from the chill (or erotic bliss) of that bath. Kṛṣṇa then dried His body until it shone radiantly. He joyfully engaged in worship, being an expert in all the rituals of the smṛti (smṛti:smara:erotic play). Kṛṣṇa sipped the nectar of Rādhā’s lips three times as ācamana and then He executed incomplete actions (anaṅga: Cupid’s sports). However, they yielded complete results because of His strong faith. At the beginning of the sacrifice, Kṛṣṇa strengthened His confidence by performing dik-bandha, closing the directions with different articles of worship. Kṛṣṇa performed kara-nyāsa (pūjā rituals with one’s hands) by placing His hands on the jeweled pots of Kiśorī’s breasts.
/R: Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 20.21-23

/Q: One mañjarī, beholding the Divine Couple’s love play, said, “Look sakhīs! The lightning, empowered by Cupid, has toppled the cloud after attacking Him.” The lattice windows of the kuñja filled with tears from the loving eyes of the mañjarīs. The maidservants standing outside fanned the Divine Couple by pulling on ropes, which were connected to a ceiling fan hanging inside the kuñja. When tears of loving ecstasy appeared, the mañjarīs cursed them because they prevented their seeing Rādhā-Mādhava’s love play. The honeybees (Kṛṣṇa’s eyes) got angry at the moon (Rādhā’s face) for drinking the nectar of their blue lotus flowers (Rādhā’s eyes). In response, the bees forcibly drank the nectar of the moon. Upon attaining their goal of light, the liberated souls danced in ecstasy as they approached the moving sun and the ascetics, taking shelter of the golden land, sang their praises. [inner meaning: Rādhā’s pearl necklace danced above the Kaustubha jewel trembling on Kṛṣṇa’s chest while the silver bells on Her golden waist belt jingled in joy.] When Madhusūdana approached Rādhā, He sang sweet songs that made the vine-like bodies of Śuka, Nārada and other rasikā devotees erupt with sāttvika-bhāvas. [inner meaning: When the honeybees neared Rādhā, they sang remarkable songs as good as the Vedas, which melted the vine-like bodies of the rasikā kinkaris (mañjarī relishers). Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 20.49 After wandering in the world for many births, crooked materialists carefully follow the path of Vedic action and attain the moon planet. [inner meaning: Rādhā’s curly locks swung here and there. Shining with Her each and every movement, they covered Rādhikā’s delicate ears and beautifully framed Her moonlike face.] Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 20.50 Rādhā-Mādhava were intoxicated from the unrestrained drinking of the liquor of love. They pierced each other’s armor of sandalwood paste and bound each other in the nooses of Their snake-like arms. The ever youthful Divine Couple intensely tried to defeat each other through Their ever fresh desires for union. Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta 20.45-51 Śyāma was inspired to touch doe-eyed Rādhā’s love-weary body. His desire disappeared, however, upon meeting the maidservants of Rādhā’s fatigue. Śyāma slowly disentangled Himself from Kiśorī’s embrace and sat up in the flower bed. With great care Kṛṣṇa arranged Kiśorī’s disarrayed hair and garments. Kṛṣṇa then affectionately dried the perspiration from Rādhārāṇī’s body with His lotus hands. Govinda-līlāmṛta 15.26 Rādhā spoke with unexpected arrogance: “Govinda! I did not ask You, so why are You arranging My hair? Do not waste Your energy. My unbound hair broadcasts My bliss. You need not wipe My face, for the drops of perspiration enhance My beauty. Do not put that jasmine garland back in My hair because its heavy weight will give Me a headache.” Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.43 Kṛṣṇa became more zealous to dress Rādhikā and She relented. Now Rādhā politely insisted, “Please paint a row of leaves on My breasts. Draw dolphins (makarī) and other pictures on My cheeks. Fasten a jeweled sash around My hips. Tie My hair in a charming braid and decorate it with strings of flowers. Fix bangles on My wrists and ankle bells on My feet.” In great delight, Śyāma obediently followed Rādhā’s every order. Gīta-govinda 12.25 Rūpa-mañjarī said to Rati-mañjarī, “O sakhī! Kṛṣṇa slowly painted the designs on Rādhā’s breasts because He was deeply relishing the happiness of touching Her nipples. Keśava’s fingers were perspiring and His hair stood erect in excitement. Rādhā repelled Śyāma’s fingers with the bumps of bliss erupting on Her breasts. Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 14.106 “O sakhī! Today, the killer of Keśi has been completely controlled by Rādhā’s love. Kṛṣṇa happily drew artistic designs and pictures on Rādhā’s beautiful firm breasts. Kṛṣṇa draped fragrant blue lotuses over Kiśorī’s ears, which have attracted many bees. Śyāma playfully tied another delicate lotus flower in Rādhā’s braid. Kṛṣṇa fully pleased Rādhā with His submissive service.” Ujjvala- nīlamaṇi 5.92 Kṛṣṇa, while arranging Kiśorī’s hair, said, “O beloved! Your curly black locks make these tilaka decorations drawn in musk look useless and redundant. Your beautiful blue eyes make the lotus flowers on Your ears wilt in comparison. The waves of beauty from Your gentle smile have crushed Your pearl necklace to dust. O Rādhikā, why wear all these ornaments? You are already splendidly decorated just by the natural beauty of Your limbs!” Vidagdha-mādhava 7.48 Kṛṣṇa finished dressing the gorgeous body of Rādhā and then He thrilled Her heart by saying, “If tilaka never disappeared from the forehead or a garland never dropped from the hair; if sandalwood paste mixed with camphor never washed off during bathing; if pearl necklaces remained forever hung on the neck; if Cupid’s new boat never left the shore; if the moonbeams never left the cakora bird, and if clouds never threw hail and lightning in the mouth of the cātaka bird, then O moon-faced Rādhā, these things could be compared to You.” Kṛṣṇa smiled and left the kuñja after fulfilling His desires to dress Rādhārāṇī according to Her orders.
/R: Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.54
-L: Mādhava enjoys the other gopīs
/Q: Mādhava submitted to Rādhā’s request to visit the sakhīs in their individual kuñjas. Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself into unlimited forms and then enjoyed intimately with every sakhī, Each gopī exhibited Rādhikā’s domineering mood (svādhīna-bhartṛkā) and Kṛṣṇa humbly served them like a henpecked husband. As they fell asleep, Kṛṣṇa left the sakhīs alone, assumed one form and returned to His smiling sweetheart, Rādhā. Govinda-līlāmṛta 23.55-56 Śyāma embraced Rādhā with His left arm and fell asleep on a fragrant bed of flowers. The mañjarīs fulfilled their long cherished desires by gently massaging the lotus feet of the Divine Couple. Kṛṣṇa- bhāvanāmṛta 20.10 All glories to Rādhikā’s visions during Her blissful repose! While dreaming, Rādhā said, “O Lalitā! Śyāma made Me sip the nectar of His moonlike face and then He drank Mine. But where were you then? Alaṅkāra-kaustubhaḥ 5.20 “Kṛṣṇa relished the nectar of My ruddy lips and offered Me the nectar of His as He initiated the battle of Cupid. Ascending the pinnacle of bliss, I closed My eyes half way and became stunned and motionless. Lalitā! You must also taste it!” Alaṅkāra-kaustubhaḥ 5.14 Śrī Rūpa and the other mañjarīs dedicated to Rādhā-Mādhava’s service left the Divine Couple alone and went to rest peacefully on a platform just outside the pastime abode (līlā mandira). Govinda- līlāmṛta 23.91 O my Lord Śyāmasundara! When will I lovingly fan Rādhā, whose eyes are closed in bliss, and whose hair is fragrant with spring flowers as She rests peacefully in Your arms in the courtyard of a bower caressed by the gentle, lotus-scented breeze from the Yamunā?
/R: Lalita-mādhava 6.41


/Q: Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī ki jai!

